All right, well, we'll usually see then.
No, you know.
Good to go.
Yeah.
Are you dispensing goodwill to the committee?
No. Reva was trying to buy goodwill.
What are you going to do to her?
No, I don't need it.
Not
yet.
Right. Well, first of all, welcome, Minister.
We've got you until 2:30, so we've got 30 minutes
with you.
You know the drill, of course. Hopefully you won't speak for too long, and then
we'll get into questions.
I don't really intend to speak at all.
I suppose just to introduce
Anna Adams KC, who's the new Solicitor General. Started when?
Oh, six weeks ago.
Six weeks ago.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
I started eight weeks
ago, roughly. I forget the exact date.
And I've got Robert Glennie, who's the acting DCE
for services and stuff here, and I've got the whole team from Crown Law behind me,
and we've got PCO here as well, because I think we're doing PCO straight after
this at half past two.
So I think everyone knows what Crown Law does.
It's a real privilege to hold the Attorney role.
And I'm a bit new into it, so is Anna, but she
obviously comes from long experience in the law and
we've inherited an institution that is obviously very important to the rule of law,
and the conduct of
Crown, and I think is doing a good job.
So I'm really in your hands.
Right. Well, I'm going to start off with Ms. Vanusi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Minister, and
congratulations both to the Minister on his new appointment and to funding
Solicitor General as well. And just to open up, I also think
it's worthwhile acknowledging the landmark settlement
in terms of the Stafford case, now that we're going to
discuss as well today.
Firstly, I'd say that it's positive to see the slight uplift
in the budget, so the 3.9%, and of course the
headline questions are, is it enough?
And is it being directed to the places where we're really seeing
we need that capacity? And maybe the context of that question
relates to the response to question 14,
where there's an identification that there's a need
for, or there's risks around Crown prosecution and the Criminal
Appeals Service, but no additional funding
in that particular part of the budget line.
I'm just wondering if you can speak to that.
But also just generally that larger question as well.
Just start with the second one. What's the larger question?
You just more generally is there enough money?
The larger question is, is it enough-
Yeah
... and is it being directed to the right places?
But that's the particular example in this case.
Yeah. I think
you're aware of the government's
fiscal objectives.
And I think Crown Law is doing a good job managing
within tight constraints like every government
agency.
Who's best placed to talk for the
14, which is the
sustainability of Crown prosecution and criminal appeal?
Anna, or do you want to speak to that?
Criminal deputy solicitor general.
Do you want to come up to the front here?
Get their names.
Yeah. Sorry, can you just say your full name for the record?
Yes. Madeleine Laracy, Deputy Solicitor General Criminal.
Thank you.
It's the bulk of the vote.
Yeah.
71% of
Crown Law's money goes out to
Crown solicitors.
Yeah.
So the question relates to, uh-
The question relates to the fact that it's an identified
risk that there might not be sufficient capacity for Crown
prosecutions and criminal appeal services.
Yes.
But in the breakdowns, it doesn't look to me like those appeals
have had an increase in funding. So the increase has gone
to the constitutional and the other team, essentially.
That's right. We had an increase to the bulk fund, which funds Crown
prosecutions, which are conducted around the country by Crown
solicitors about three
or four years ago.
That
is a capped fund, and it hasn't
increased since then.
Undoubtedly, there is a
steady percentage increase in the
volume of cases Crown solicitors prosecute, which is the more serious
ones,
and we manage the sustainability of that
service by monitoring
that workload and pretty carefully.
So we don't see any occasion to be
suggesting that it's got to the point of being unsustainable at the
moment. But we do have forecasting that suggests in
a
year or so we will have to be looking at that carefully again if volumes
continue to increase.
For the appeals work,
much like the criminal trials that they come from, criminal
appeals are increasing in volume year on year and
in complexity. One of the mechanisms we
have for managing within the money available in the
criminal appeals appropriation, which is separate, is we can
either do the appeals ourself, which we do most of, and certainly the more complex
ones, or we brief them mainly to Crown solicitors, and we have very
cost-effective arrangements for doing that.
Essentially, we will put a cap on how many hours they can charge us for,
regardless of how much time they spent.
There is a judgment there in particular cases, but there are arrangements that
are extremely beneficial for the Crown to deal with criminal appeals.
Did you have a follow-up?
Thank you. So with the Public Prosecution Service, the
funding stayed the same, and I understand that maintaining cost.
In the last cycle, there was a requirement to make some savings.
Which team was that-
Uh, which team was that made to, just to get a benchmark?
So we
went through about four organizational restructures in the last two years,
focused on enabling services.
So,
we define frontline services as legal counsel, Crown Law.
So this was corporate services really taking the brunt
of the savings. Yeah.
So not to public prosecution services.
No.
Okay. Thank you.
Right. You all right with that?
Yeah.
Right. I'm going to-
Fewer executive assistants, basically. Is that right?
Fewer-
... support services, yes
... corporate services. Okay.
Yeah.
Okay. I'm going to Joseph Maney.
Yeah, thank you. And, look, it's just a follow-on question,
noting that it's approximately 71% of Crown funding
is distributed to the Crown Solicitors Network.
And look,
just from the context of my own background, I was on the Crown Prosecution panel,
but primarily did defense law for about a decade.
Something that would really
de-complexify things would be
the evidence provided early and comprehensively.
Because there's a real game, frankly, that goes on
with not providing disclosure early, and the Criminal Procedure Act doesn't
actually require it for a plea,
and that's a issue in itself. But repeatedly,
and I did a lot of jury trials, repeatedly, evidence would only be provided at the
last minute or, in fact, during the jury trial.
That leaves a lot of complexity. So could I just
ask if there's any thinking around addressing that fundamental underlying
issue?
It's more
of a policy or operational issue rather than a funding, but-
Well, it comes back to the funding, because some of the funding of complexities
because of this underlying issue.
You're probably right.
I definitely rec- of course, we all, anyone in the criminal
justice system, whatever
side they're on in terms of being a party or a judge, recognizes the
problem you're mentioning.
The Crown
Prosecution Network certainly uses the levers it has.
It's important to remember, obviously, in this context, that
the body that has the material that's available for
disclosure is not the prosecutors.
That's the investigative material.
Mm-hmm.
And that is held by police.
Police are working to develop various processes and have
developed what we call the,
what, CJSU, Criminal Justice-
Support Unit
... Support Unit, yes, thank you.
Yeah.
Which is responsible for disclosure and great bulk of
certainly the less serious cases, and they have various other mechanisms
to support the Chief Justice's practice
note, to make sure that disclosure is happening.
That, and possibly more attention now in terms of the
recognition that difficult disclosure cases, which
literally just flow from the fact, as you'll be well aware, that so many more
cases involve great volumes of electronic evidence.
Mm.
Those cases need careful judicial management as well, and there are
increasing processes to ensure that.
But of course, that just adds to judge time.
But Crown Prosecutors, where they are aware that disclosure
needs to happen and hasn't happened, are under very solemn
expectations, which they fully understand, to make sure that police do
disclose material.
What is disclosed late, in my experience, is often
reports that have come in late or formal written
statements that weren't available earlier, or material that
hadn't been recognized as being relevant until issues
crystallized. But certainly accept that the Crown has a
important part to play here.
If I could ask one little supplementary on that.
Okay.
Chair, just very briefly.
And thank you for that. That's a very good articulation, I think, of some of the
issues. But,
and recognizing it's usually the
instructing agency-
Mm
... that is responsible for the disclosure.
But is there a piece of work being considered to address that
fundamental issue and working with those agencies to develop a better practice?
There is actually.
About three or four years ago,
we set up with police, for instance, a
senior Crown solicitors working with some senior people in
police, a disclosure working group to not
only
help me finalize some guidance, which we put out to
all Crown Prosecutors, but also to be identifying the
types of cases where disclosure issues are routinely
arising or trying to sort of anticipate what the
future disclosure issues are going to be.
So that's one mechanism we have. The other
mechanism, of course, is that disclosure issues are being increasingly litigated.
So our office, me in particular, pay a
lot of attention to that case law,
and then thinking about what are all prosecutors' responsibilities,
not just Crown Prosecutors, based on the case law that we see
evolving.
Thank you.
Okay. Now I'm going back to Vanushi Walters.
Just recognizing that in terms of predicting for future workflow, this is one of
the areas where it's very difficult because you're responding essentially.
However, there is one area where
the work is either generated or not, depending on what the
government passes in terms of legislation and what kind of litigation risk
it presents. Are we seeing an increasing number of judicial
reviews taken against the government in recent times, and
is that why we're seeing an uplift in the
budget relating to constitutional issues? For the first question.
That's a good question.
Who wants to deal with that? Anna?
I can.
Tara?
Yeah, I can address the funding at least.
So the funding is really due to a technical transfer, an expense
transfer. So we've taken some surplus from last year and moved it across
to next year and then two route years to help fund a new
legal practice management system.
So that is really the driver of that
movement and funding. Otherwise, baseline is
static really. No savings required, but also no new
initiatives. Yeah.
And the question about an increasing number of JR's.
And I'll pass that on to-
Do we actually have data on that? I don't know. Do we, Aaron?
Not specifically, but there is an uptick in the- There is
an uptick. Plus the tribunal. I'm told there's an uptick.
It's probably true.
You'd be aware
that there is a significant volume of quite significant litigation for the
courts at the moment.
We are waiting on four decisions around public law compensation and criminal
cases, Patua, Fitzgerald, Rapanui, and Porori.
It'd be fair to say we are dealing with a significant range of quite
complicated public law and human rights issues, some of which have arisen
through litigation, others not.
So-
Well
... there's not a lot the Crown can do about that. I get sued.
I'm the most sued man in New Zealand.
Perhaps just as a supplementary, Minister, there is another way that the
Crown can potentially manage its litigation
costs, and that's by legislating to prevent cases
proceeding up to more senior courts.
Now, there's government view on that, but of course, the attorney has a special
role to play in our democracy, and I wonder if you'd comment on
whether you believe that that's a constitutionally appropriate way in which
for the government to manage its-
You're talking about Smith?
I am.
Yeah, I'm very comfortable with it.
All right. Now I'm going to go to Dr. Sun.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. Just following up from what the previous
speakers asked, and your response around the
static, I guess, nature of the Law Office constitutional criminal law duties.
In the supplementary estimates, there is
the estimates and the supplementary estimates see a reduction
of, or savings of 2.7 million.
Which again, is what you're saying has now been supplemented.
That's correct.
But considering that there was an underspend in the last financial year, why
does it need to be increased from what was
12.4, I think, now to
13.7?
Yeah, we do run a full multi-category appropriation.
Yeah.
So we can shift between categories there.
But yeah,
the funding is there to implement a new legal practice management system and the
cloud licensing associated with that.
Just a few more in terms of the budget side.
One of the things we do see there has been a reduction of is in the public
prosecution service for the provision and supervision of national Crown Prosecution
Service and oversight of public prosecution, particularly a reduction
for improving the justice response to sexual violence victims.
Why is there been a reduction in that?
Carry on.
That's an initiative back to Budget '19.
So that was a structured
diminishing
initiative. So this is the last year of reductions.
It was front-loaded to allow for training and getting it set up,
and then a
reducing
sort of portfolio over the years. So this is the last year of the
reductions. Yeah.
Is that
from a perspective that people are now trained and that
it's no longer... Or is that no longer necessary when it
comes to justice response to sexual
violence victims?
There's still ongoing funding. It's just hit now
the last level of reduction, and now it'll be static.
So there's still allowed for the volume of cases to come through
and
to address sexual violence, family violence victims.
Final question just around this. I think this is
one of the key areas we've heard from the long-term insight
briefing, and now coming to now is the increase in
terms of complexity of cases.
Mm.
But also, one of the things we heard previously is this
increase in the number of people who are potentially using
AI, self-representing, and all of those.
Is this something that Crown
Law has factored into how they're going to be able to litigate and how they're able
to... The kind of capacity or burden issue it plays on Crown Law, and
has that been factored into this year's budget?
I don't think it's been factored into the budget, but it's a...
I don't know. Do you want to comment on AI? Anyone or someone? Erin?
In terms of Crown Prosecution-
Oh, sorry.
Specifically.
Yeah.
These issues mainly arise in the context of more pretrial applications.
So Crown solicitors are dealing with them.
They're arguing
those.
We measure the total time that the Crown Prosecution
Network is spending on cases over the course of the year.
As we see the total hours increasing and the total number of
cases increasing, that does go into, obviously, our overall sort of
assessment of at what point does the current funding become unsustainable.
Okay.
But we're not sort of in a position to
single out the impact on the Crown Prosecution Service
of challenges that have been raised, say, by AI in the context of
evidence.
Okay.
We're looking at total-
But what about from your perspective, how much are you using AI?
Are you using that to help mitigate some of the cost escalation you're seeing
because of the complexity?
Has it been embraced within the
Department?
I could speak to that.
In the legal environment, AI is
both a complicating factor and a solution.
So in legal research, for example, our library is trialing the same
AI system as the courts are, which essentially it's a
legally research function
orientated around case law, and it makes researching
incredibly quick-
Yeah
... for then absorption by librarians and lawyers, and it speeds the
process up.
In the document and evidential analysis space, AI is
also
quite a revolutionary solution to very large
volumes of evidence. For example, these days you have a legal AI
program called Harvey, which can essentially take all of the documents
loaded into a database for a particular case, put them in a document vault,
and then enable the lawyers on the case to query the vault-
Yeah
... instead of reading the documents.
Cool
And then cross-check the answers it gives them against it.
So,
the Crown Law at the moment is in a process of trialing these
different solutions. They will make a difference
to legal practice generally, and obviously as an organization, we have to keep up
with it.
So I see them more as
solutions rather than problems, but there is, of course, many
ethical and legal concerns around actually using
AI directly without human involvement in legal document.
To be careful, I think it was a
Supreme Court case the other day in which a self-represented litigant
cited a bunch of cases that were generated by AI that were made
up.
Phantom.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Phantom cases.
Was it Supreme Court?
But the reality is-
Senior Court of Appeal One, we-
Senior Court of Appeal
... we spent hours-
Yeah
... trying to work out-
Find it
... these citations were true or false.
Oh, really?
Yeah. Yeah.
But that doesn't-
Yeah
... good AI practice will always have a role of a human.
That's the number one component in it.
But in terms of the people you're opposing in
court, they'll be using it as much as anyone.
So it should be regarded, I
presume, as a way of at least dealing with a lot of the research, as
you quite rightly say, but also framing up arguments.
But ultimately, you all have your prosecutors who all
have deeper knowledge of what's going on, I presume.
But anyone who's not
using AI must be well behind the
ball park.
It's an essential part of legal practice increasingly.
Yeah.
And the courts themselves issued a protocol about it, I
think it was last year, giving guidance to when
lawyers can use AI and-
Yeah
... when they must cite that they did use it.
And so I think we do have a framework in New Zealand for the use of AI
in litigation.
But yes, if Crown Law
is practicing in this space as it must do and it must lead in this space,
then
it needs to absorb AI like every other firm.
Thank you. We're going to Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thank you. Oh, if you're okay, Anna, I'm going to ask you some questions.
Sure.
Sorry, Minister. But I want to say thanks for taking on this role, and actually
thank you for your service on the Farming Board.
But actually staying a little bit with this theme, you've come obviously in
from private practice.
Workforce capability within Crown Law, what have you observed?
Are there any kind of skill gaps or things that you're thinking about that are
going to need to change in the next year or two around the types of
people you have employed or the skill sets you need, particularly with some of the
changes, say, in technology?
Not immediately, and my impression is that Crown Law is
a wellspring of legal talent and expertise.
They're extremely talented lawyers spread across the Auckland and Wellington
offices.
Obviously, our practice has to evolve depending on the demand that comes in from
the government. In the last couple of years, I can see, looking at the
patterns, that there is an extremely high demand in the area of
infrastructure, natural resources,
planning, treaty cases, public law cases.
So that naturally means that we have to shape our
legal workforce to meet that demand.
But that's something we have in common with
all legal practices. And of course, we run a national practice
across both offices, and we have,
I guess, what you might call a porous membrane with the wider legal profession in
that people work at Crown Law, and then they work elsewhere in practice, and I
think that's a good thing. It strengthens and diversifies the organization.
Which is actually just one more supplementary, which is actually going to be about
retention of talent, because yeah, obviously they may come to Crown Law, get a
great foundation, then move into private practice.
Have you, yeah, thought about ways of either attracting people back
or trying to retain them with different initiatives?
I think the thing that retains people at Crown Law is the quality and the interest
of the work.
Mm-hmm.
I think that really is what does it.
Yeah.
But, I don't see it as a bad thing that people might come and go.
I think that actually diversifies their experience and strengthens their
different variety of legal perspectives.
And particularly with litigation, it's actually a real skill builder for
any lawyer to practice in different environments and subject
areas. So...
Historically, Crown Law has been regarded as
a great,
training ground is the wrong phrase, but a great place to work
because the quality of the work you work on-
Yeah
... sort of almost by definition is interesting and intellectually
stimulating. And that's a good thing.
And as Anna says, in my view, it's not a bad thing that people do some
time at Crown Law and go off into
either corporate world or in-house
counsel at another government agency
or
on their own account or whatever, and then come and go. But that's good.
Then, it probably helps re-energize Crown Law as people come and go a
bit.
So, that's a positive thing.
All right.
I started
as a summer clerk at Crown Law.
Did you?
I did.
Oh, gosh.
Back when they took summer clerks.
Yeah.
Make way up for a full-time job.
Maybe we should bring it back.
We've got five minutes left, so I've got two questions from Vanusi Walters.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I didn't get to ask this supplementary earlier,
but I wonder, Minister, you'd expand on your answer to my last
question.
About Smith?
About Smith.
Sure.
Because it sounded to me like the minister is saying that
there is no constitutional difference if the government
legislate before a case reaches the Supreme Court
versus after. Now, in my view, those are quite different things.
Can you frame this in terms of the budget?
That the-
Or maybe-
This is money or-
No.
It's a forward-looking cost-
Yeah, okay
... in terms of managing litigation, and it felt to me that
the minister was saying that this is an appropriate way in which to
manage future litigation risk, which attaches to future
litigation costs.
Okay. Well, look, it's actually a relatively straightforward issue.
We have the Supreme Court judgment, which has left open the idea
that, a tort of climate damage
could be developed.
The government's view,
I think reasonably, is that we have an entire
statutory schema to deal with climate change, the Climate
Change Response Act and the Emissions Trading Scheme,
and that for very good public policy reasons, allowing the courts
to develop in an ad hoc way, potentially develop,
and I stress potentially, because the Supreme Court didn't actually rule on that,
they just said it's open.
That the prospect of that is destabilizing for business confidence and for
the proper development of the law.
And so you kind of got two options at that point.
You can either say,
"Okay. Well, that's interesting.
We can let the court develop or let the law develop and come back
in eight to 10 years, and potentially legislate
over the top of it."
In the meantime,
a degree of chaos ensues.
Or you can just cut to the quick and deal with the issue now,
and Parliament can act to make sure that that doesn't happen
through putting in place a statutory bar and provide legal certainty, and that's
the decision that the government has taken.
And that, to me, feels
like an appropriate course of action.
There's no fruits of litigation to get rid of.
Well, so the minister doesn't believe that it would've been the more
constitutionally appropriate thing to let the court case proceed to the
Supreme Court, which it's scheduled to do next year?
No, I think part of the problem, in the development of the law over the last few
years in New Zealand, is that Parliament has been too unwilling to legislate when
they think the law has taken a wrong course.
Ultimately in our constitution,
the elected chamber, the elected legislature is sovereign,
and
Parliament is supreme, and if Parliament thinks that the law is taking an
incorrect course, then they should say so, and that's what
legislation ultimately is.
Okay, so something new?
Something new. All right.
So this is a question about the Financial
Sustainability programs, the
FSP, which was initially put in place only in
July 2024. That shifted then to the
Organizational Change Improvement team, which has, I understand, a broader
mandate. Does that mandate include, the
scope of looking at restructure and redundancy?
What does the
broadening of that mandate?
Sorry.
No, you want a go.
It does have a broader mandate than the Financial Sustainability Program, yes.
I guess the foundation of it is a similar concept,
but we did establish the Financial Sustainability Program to look
at surviving within a reduced baseline.
So that was really the nexus of that.
So we went through
some organizational change. We've looked at process improvements
to help
make more efficient legal services.
And then this has
sort of spurned the need for a Organizational Change and Improvement
team,
and that one of the biggest projects is this legal practice management system
that they will look after.
If there is a need, then potentially this team could
look after
or help support some organizational
restructuring if required. Certainly, but that's not the purpose of it,
no.
Okay. Right. We're at
2:30.
I'm going to thank the officials.
Thank you.
New Solicitor General.
Thank you for coming in. Now, you're obviously going to stay there, Minister.
I'll stay.
Let's swap over.
We've got PCO.
We've got some more lawyers.
We'll do that transition.
Thank you.
It's good to see you.
We will see you again.
Watch as well if you want.
Didn't mind.
Pass on the bat up, too.
Yep.
Now we've got PCO here.
We love PCO.
We do. We do. They do the hard yards. Very exciting.
We're doing a statutory spring clean.
I loved that release.
Hope you all saw my press release.
I did. I read it.
I'm a guy who likes smaller government, so we're making a vague start on it.
150 outdated or obsolete laws are going.
You must read my press release. It's full of very fun puns.
Including about the Wellington Milk Supply Act 2019, but there's a whole list here.
Duncan, you'll be very upset, the Canterbury Society of Arts Preserve Act 1889,
Extension Act 1891. That's on the chopping block, my friend
That's now towards the center of contemporary arts, actually, but-
Likewise, the Christchurch City Reclamation and Empowering Act 1964, that's gone
Adding 1964
It's going to go. Sumner Borough Land Vesting Act.
I haven't seen any in a while-
Did you throw in Rebecca Carter in there as well?
The Dunedin City Fish Markets and Empowering Act 1918.
As if there wasn't enough on World War I at the time, Parliament passed
a law to allow the Dunedin City Council to engage in the fish trade, and also buy
and sell sheep. So anyway, we've been running this-
Oh, no
... I'm taking the p**s a little bit, but also it is quite funny, and quite useful.
PCO have been running this repeals project
since, when did you start it? 2020?
About 12 months.
12 months ago.
Have you got more to go?
We've got 152 have been identified.
We're consulting on them now, and then you've got another 50 coming.
Mm-hmm.
And there'll be more after that.
There'll be more after that.
There will be.
Yeah.
It gets harder and harder as we get into
the acts. Often there's land, so you have to work
out whether that land still exists, who holds that land now, and
what's happened to it.
Mm-hmm.
So there's a lot of work to do.
It is quite important. Our statute books has grown like Topsy.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, there's too many laws. Too many words.
You can get a few from earlier in this term.
What's that?
I would welcome that.
Oh, well, they're not on the chopping block.
But the Wellington milk supply thing is quite funny, because, a
lawyer actually applied for a license, and there was a lot-- that's actually quite
a genuine issue, because he said, "Well, the act says you've got to issue me a
license."
And,
the city council said, "Well, you've got to be joking." And he said, "Well, the
law's the law. I want a license to sell milk."
I think it's an exclusive license. Is that right?
I don't know, actually.
There was only one act.
So, it would have been exclusive.
So anyway, we had to do a deal in which he-- well, he took action in the courts,
and we had to reach an agreement with them to seek to remove the law,
which we're now doing. But, every now and then you
think ooh-
So that's good stuff, and no doubt members have got lots of questions on that.
Is there anything else you want to highlight for the committee this morning?
No, I just wanted to highlight that.
All right. Good. Right. We're going to start up with Mr.
Tom Rutherford, and then we'll go to over here to my good friend.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd be interested to know all 152 of them.
It's on the back of my press release. You can see it.
Taking that-
I'm very excited about it
... I'm providing the minister the opportunity to-
No, no.
No, no. I think we've got better uses of time.
No other questions, Mr. Rutherford?
I'll come back.
I've got a supplementary.
Really?
It's a serious supplementary.
A serious one, okay.
Mr. Chair.
No, mine is a serious supplementary. Thank you for your work on this.
But obviously going forward into the year that we're now talking about, the
estimates-
Yep. What happened
... yeah, how much of your time will be spent on this, and obviously have
you set aside money in the budget to continue to do this?
Well, we have at least one and a half people on this work at
the moment. So, yeah.
I had two fake questions from government members.
Well, your interpretation of fake is different to mine.
You've got 25 minutes. Have you finished your question?
We've got a time limit.
Yes, they're answering. Please, quiet everyone.
Yeah, please, let's finish. We've got one and a half people?
Yes. And there is some research work to do-
Yeah
... to get to the end of it. But it's valuable work, and what will
happen at the end is that we will publish results of that, even if it doesn't
result in the repeal, so people know why it stayed on the statute book.
Yeah.
So it's important legal research and interpretation.
I'm glad you said that.
Thank you.
Right. Now I'm going to Dr. Sun Nun, please.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair.
I think a lot of this comes from the new funding and the drafting and
access to legislation initiative, and I want to check, and I know this is
something that Camilla, you had questions on as well in terms of amendments.
Has there been an increase in terms of workload for the
PCO, and there's also the fact in this budget when it comes to the drafting of
legislation.
Yes.
But also in terms of what would that mean in the interaction with,
for example, the Regulatory Standards Act, and how
has that been put both in terms of capacity, but
also
urgency and time-wise burden for the PCO?
The short answer is, I'll deal with the first one, is yes, there is.
And,
2025, there was an out-of-cycle funding increase for immediate cost
pressures for legislative delivery,
1.292 million. So 10 FTE on the back of
that have been onboarded,
with a further drafting recruitment round underway as well.
So the short answer is yes, Parliament is
passing more legislation and, as I think you know, Lawrence,
passing it more quickly,
all of which requires drafting resource.
And,
what was the second question? It was quite a good one.
I think the second one is whether then this runs into both
capacity, but also in terms of the kind of urgency we're
seeing in terms of a lot of the legislation,
whether that also adds additional pressure in terms of the 10 FTEs
that you just mentioned, Minister, and how would that work in terms of the spread
of those 10 FTEs?
Well, you do things more... I mean, just to make a general point, and Cassie might
want to comment. But if you do things more quickly,
you've got to get them right by definition-
Mm-hmm
... and that requires resource to check.
And by definition, if you do things more quickly, sometimes you've got to go and
fix them, all of which requires drafting resource.
I'll just make that as a general point.
Cassie might want to comment on it.
No, absolutely, Attorney. I mean, I absolutely second to what the Attorney said,
but also, I suppose,
simply adding more FTE probably isn't our long-term solution.
Like, it's an important aspect, and it's been really significant to be able to do
that drafting recruitment round, and another one this year.
But we are looking at digital tools as well to try and
get it to a more sustainable approach,
ensuring that we can automate some of our low-hanging fruit
quality review tool, explanatory note-
Mm
... first draft generator. These are important aids, I guess, to
helping to make sure that the drafting FTE is focused on the hard
work and the low-
This is AI, right?
AI, yeah.
I would like to know more about that, but I guess the Does PCO see
that as being a concern, and a concern addressed with the Attorney General
on this potentially every successive government, every term, not
even successive, every term, the new government will
want to play a top trump and in creating even more legislation, and we're going to
be seeing more and more and more. Is that something that
PCO has raised concerns with or is aware of?
Well, we've certainly made it sure that the attorney and others in the government's
generally aware of the quantity of legislation-
Yeah
... coming through, and we've done some research on that.
Right.
And
that's transparently sort of obvious, I think,
to the public, and I think it's a broader system question, really, about what the
House can actually-
To get you done. We'll go to-
Oh, okay.
Go to-
Yep, sure.
We'll give you, I'll give you a number, sorry, that you'll be interested in this.
In 2001, there were 15,000 words on the
statute books.
15 million.
Sorry, 15 mil-
Million.
Sorry, 15 million.
50.
That was a, yep.
That would be nice.
15 million.
A bit more than a million.
No, no, no. Yep, 15 million.
And by
2024 or '5, we'd have got up to 23
million.
Yeah.
So-
The new ones-
It's quite a jump
... or words you'd found?
Eh?
Were they new words or words you'd found?
Well, the Repeals Project will help delete some of that.
Yeah. Good on you.
Don't know how many. Probably not that much.
Let's go to the new-
It's relatively short lists.
So the scale of legislation is one thing, and the numbers are increasing.
The other issue is the way in which bills are managed through the
House, and-
Okay, this is a budget question.
It is. It relates to capacity.
Budget pace of the bills going up.
It relates to capacity. So,
what is the impact of bills skipping select committee process
or amendments coming to the table late in terms of
PCO's work, and is that side of things increasing
as well?
I think that it's always
though, I guess to a certain extent, the more work you put in before a bill comes
into the House, the less work you'll probably have to do as it comes through the
House. But there will be obviously impacts as changes are
made through the House quote, and the more significant the change is, the more...
And that can arise in multiple ways, including through select committee or
including through policy changes on a bill as it goes through the
House.
Well, let's be honest about it. There's a couple of underlying issues here which
successive governments have had to grapple with. One is, we have a three-year term.
By the time you take out the summer holidays,
school holidays, field days, estimates week, scrutiny week,
and all that sort of stuff, and you sit at 2:00 through till 10:00, three days a
week or two and a half days a week.
There's just not enough time to pass stuff in Parliament.
That is the underlying issue. And
no one has been able to come up with a good answer to what to do about it.
I've been on standing orders-
Yeah
... in which we've considered any number of different options.
Mondays, Fridays,
mornings. It's not clear what the right answer
is.
Yeah. No, and thank you, Minister. I agree with you.
I think that it's a very tight timeframe.
That's why governments take urgency.
But I do think-
It's just for time
... but this particular government has also made the interesting decision
to pass the Regulatory Standards Act-
Yeah
... which my colleagues referenced.
And I don't think we quite got to an answer on that.
So the question is, just that on its own, has that made it more
complex and drawn capacity into it?
The Regulatory Standards Act's not in force yet. It starts on the 1st of July.
So it's going to be interesting to see-
In terms of the budget ahead, though, that covers this budget period.
Yeah. Well, you might want to comment on that.
It has been-
Planning you've done for the RSA
No, I think certainly we assisted with developing the guidance
for supporting the minister's role in issuing that, but
we don't see PCO as having a role in signing off consistency
assessment statements or it's not our formal role.
We would do the same role we would do with
Bill of Rights Act vets or legislation guidelines.
As part of our drafting role, we will support agencies.
We'll let them know if we see concerns or try and support them to resolve them.
But we would see that as part of our drafting role rather than having an additional
new role to deal with Regulatory Standards Act.
The consistency statements are issued by the agencies.
Mm-hmm.
And obviously, in the drafting, PCO will,
many of the principles in the RSA reflect
LDAC guidelines already.
They do, very much so.
So it's the sort of thing my drafters are used to thinking about in development.
Yeah.
So it almost seems like a duplication in many ways.
It doesn't add extra resource in terms of-
Well, you can make that argument.
All sorts of crazy things, frankly, have been said
about the Regulatory Standards Act.
At its base level, it is designed to make
lawmakers, you, us, me, all of us,
think about
fundamental issues of statutory construction
and legislative architecture and the way in which we do it.
And is that a bad thing? Well, probably not, actually.
Frankly, if Parliament spent more time thinking about some of these issues over the
last 25 years, we probably wouldn't have another eight million words on the statute
books, and
maybe we'd have had better law.
Doctor Shen. Yeah, just following up on this question and going back to the
urgency and the need to draft quickly and not having the time to
process some of those. What
has PCO factored in, in terms of drafting errors?
Minister, you mentioned in terms of being precise.
So to give two examples, in the
Budget bill, the Social Security Modernisation Amendment Bill, there was a drafting
error within there. And then also in terms of Education and Training System Reform
Amendment Bill, between two committee stages, the ministers have to bring in a new
amendment to address the drafting errors when it comes to the commencement date.
So we are also seeing an increasing frequency of drafting errors.
Well, that's why you have a committee stage
But I'm guessing is
with that, it
also then means extra work because then you have to go back and correct
things as they're happening.
So-
Is that something that is being considered or factored into as part of
the drafting legislative agenda that
is being proposed?
We will factor that in in the sense that-
Things should be-
... when we've got a complicated large bill that's moving at speed, we'd more like
to put more than one person on that bill to ensure that
we've got enough resilience in the team and agility to cope with issues as they
arise. But obviously, if issues are moving at pace, there will
be things that arise in that context.
We do the best we can to ensure that we're both reviewing them and
giving good advice, but quite often those aren't necessarily drafting errors.
They can be policy errors or other errors that
arise.
One of the things I stress to ministers, and I used to do this when I was leader of
the house as well, now I've got a different hat on, although
slightly similar, is
it's better to take the time to get things right up front,
rather than rush a bill into the house.
Agreed.
And,
this government's done it and past governments have done it too, and
it's often to meet political objectives and various
commitments and things like that.
But rushing bills in, in particular, rushing a bill in
before it's ready and PCO have had enough time to
breathe with it and live with it and get it right, creates problems
down the line. And there's a number of examples of bills
before the house right now where
things were probably rushed
and have run into big problems.
But as I say, the underlying constraint on all of this
is,
A,
we only sit for three years, and, B,
not enough time in Parliament to do what the government wants to get done.
And it's not just this government that's faced that problem.
The last government did too, and the government before that.
Okay. Right. We're going to Venetia, but hopefully some new material. All right?
Yep, absolutely. So, I understand that PCO's reviewing
the wider functional implications of the Legislation
Amendment Act.
Oh, yes. This is exciting. Mm.
And what that exciting function, yeah, already got me smiling, will
look like and what it'll mean for capacity.
I imagine that that will be an increased capacity that needs to
go towards ensuring maintenance of the website,
ensuring not being the compliance officer, but certainly still being that
in a hub. However, when I look at the appropriations,
I see the spike in 2027/28 and
then a dip back down. And I'm just wondering
at what stage you're at in terms of the review and what the modeling looks like
going forward.
Mm. Well, obviously,
we've done quite a lot so far because we've already got the website relaunched
March this year. And so the technology side of it
is,
a big chunk of that is delivered.
The next phase is really taking it forward into making sure
we've got everything there in a technology sense to support single point of access.
So there's technology changes still to come, building on the website that's there
now. There is also the people side of things to make sure that we've got, as you
said, the people there to look after and really support agencies
through the transition. We do see a peak of work over the
next year or 18 months to really help agencies and support them get
there, lift their publication standards to the standard it will need to ensure
that single point of access works as intended.
That's why we do expect there to be a real
higher need of workforce before we come back to a more BAU level,
I expect.
In terms of
where we're at in the review currently, we're still currently right in the middle
of that review, so I probably can't jump to
any too quick conclusions. But we are
reasonably confident we'll be able to manage within our baseline.
I don't know if you want to add at all to that, Carl.
No, that's what we're planning on at the moment is to be able to deliver this
within our baseline.
Was that the expectation when we had the previous or the
earlier legislation where PCO was it and was the
coordinator? It was expected to run under baseline as well?
Do you mean the centralized system?
The centralized.
No, we didn't get... No, that was not the expectation.
That wasn't the case.
No.
Okay.
But there was no budget approval to support a
centralized publication for-
Did you have a sup on this, Dr. Suna?
Yeah, just on the legislation amendment.
And I want to focus specifically on secondary legislation.
I've got two questions. And as part of it, from
memory when we had a preview,
Cassie, you mentioned there is sort of an automated tool that pulls in different
secondary legislation. I want to check whether there's a budgetary
connotation around having an actual person reviewing,
being able to make sure that the secondary legislations being pulled in from
different agencies are
syncing well within that new system. Has there been any work being done on that?
Yeah, that is the work that Carl's leading right now.
So-
That's right. So we'll use technology, but we will have
people who are supporting the verification of that
information as well. So it's not
just an automatic system.
Yeah.
We will need to build some compliance
function within the organization and an ability to check and
verify that information and engage with agencies when we find errors.
And just lastly, in terms of this coming year, because I
remember there being a specific timeframe that secondary
legislation from their agencies needs to be in a
particular format in order for them to continue to have effect, not the ones
PCO's drafted.
How is
PCO going to work with the agencies to ensure that
as much of that is being done by the agencies?
What sort of capacity is required from PCO for that?
So the main transition date is November 2027.
So the start-
Yes
... of the transition starts November 2026.
Yeah, it was 18 months, wasn't it? Yeah.
And so by November 2027, the agencies need to be ready.
Yeah.
And our system needs to be able to
collect that information. So there's a decent amount of runway
there for us to be really clear about the requirements on
agencies, to make sure that they are publicized, agencies know exactly what they
need to do, that we have our system set up to be able to collect it, and we've got
our compliance monitoring systems in place as well, and the people in
place to do that.
And that's all part of that same appropriation that my colleague Venetia also had
mentioned, right? That's all been factored into that. Okay, thank you.
That's helpful.
I'd just like to
congratulate you. I seem to recall back in
2014- ... a young Mr. Bishop, a young Mr. Bailey.
I wondered if you were going to bring this up.
And Mr. Parker and Mr. Cunliffe, amongst, and Mr.
Chester Burrows, sat on a committee talking at length
about this. In fact, we used to have monthly updates on the
progress-
We did
... of bringing this to life.
We were cram- we were-
So I just-
Thank you.
I literally want to thank you. That's one of the things that people-
DINLIs
... have been here for a little while.
DINLIs. What are they called?
Yeah. DINLIs.
DINLIs.
Yes.
Yeah. What does it stand for again?
Disallowable-
Instrument.
Yeah
... that's not a legislative instrument.
Exactly. We had a long conversation about that and other things related.
It was an entire inquiry.
So I just wanted to say
it is beautiful that Parliament is finally bringing this to life.
12 years on. Look where we started our careers, regulations review.
Yes. And none of us are going gray in the meantime.
David Parker, Shane Cunliffe.
All right.
Sent to exile.
Me and Dave.
Enough clapping. Back to business.
Me and-
Back to scrutiny
Yeah. Now we're back here. Right. Now, Venetia, you got more?
Yes. Thank you.
Right.
Yep. And, and I'm also-
And hopefully there's... Yeah
... I'm also very excited by this because I was on regs review last term when it
came through that.
Oh, yeah.
So very excited.
One of those all the gigs- ... at din ли site.
I just wanted to talk about the workforce capability-
Yeah
... issues that the organization is facing because we've talked a lot
about pressure, workload,
lege coming through the House much more quickly in different ways.
Obviously, that creates pressure.
And from what I understand,
it has been a burnout risk, wellbeing issues identified,
but also potential loss of critical expertise, and it is a very
specialized skill. And I understand that as
of the 30th of June, 11% of the workforce is
aged over 65.
So just a question about how that's being addressed in the immediate term
because there are immediate needs, but also it feels like a horizon
issue that you might need to think through in terms of the decade ahead.
Well, as you say,
member, drafting is a specialized skill, and people
do tend to come and stay for us much longer, which does mean that you
have the huge benefit of that deep experience.
But even for PCO, workforce patterns have changed in the last
few years.
We have been recruiting people
more regularly, going out and building a much more sustainable pipeline.
We have got in place the new drafting development team, which
the new funding allowed us to make permanent, as I said previously,
which gives us a
way of bringing people on board that keeps them as a tight cohort.
Gives them a lot more supported entry to the drafting kind of specialization.
Gives a much more consistent training, make sure that it's more robust.
To a certain extent, that enables us to feel more confident about them being able
to
cope with all the legislation coming through faster.
So I think that
we do have a sort of a slightly older work
profile perhaps than many agencies, but we really benefit from that, and we see
that as a strength-
Mm
... by and beyond a weakness, put it that way.
Lance, you keep going.
Yeah, just a supplementary on that.
But also, I wanted to kind of jump on this regs review bandwagon and state that I
currently sit on regs review.
Oh.
But I'm not even a permanent member.
Of course.
I sit on it under stage one to two.
Of course you do. I knew you would be.
But I want to check, based on what you're saying,
one of the things that's mentioned
is around that the funding is likely to require
reprioritization. And I kind of want to check following on from
Venetia Calder's questions regarding capacity and
turnover and staff retention is do you see...
What does that reprioritization look like?
What are some of the gaps that you see in that reprioritization?
How would that affect
personnel?
Well, we very actively manage our vacancies.
We utilize... We just very actively use our workforce
levers to ensure that we're filling roles that have highest need and highest value
at the point in time. That's probably what,
and with reprioritization, we're just really assessing where the highest need is
relative to others.
Okay. We're going to shake it up, and we're going to have Camilla Belich.
Thank you. I have a question. Obviously, you're here as Attorney General, and I
think I can fit it into the Parliamentary Counsel side by
asking about your role in vetting legislation as it's
drafted.
I've read two of your vets.
Technically about the Crown Law, but I'm happy to take it.
I've read two of your vets recently-
Mm
... and they have been critical of the legislation in the
sense that they've found Bill of Rights breaches on move on or extend on-
Mm
... man, woman bill. I just wanted to ask you what your approach is
and what assurances that you can give this committee around
making sure that you identify Bill of Rights breaches when they arise
in legislation that you're vetting in your role as Attorney General.
Sure. It's the same
process as has been since 1990,
per Section 7. So,
I get advice from both the Ministry of Justice and Crown Law, depending
on the type of bill.
And I form a judgment based on that advice, and then
if I decide that it is a breach, an
unjustifiable breach, because there are lots of things that on-
Mm
... on their face breach
the Bill of Rights. But the issue is, of course, Section 5, as you know.
Is it a justified limit on a right? And if it is, then I issue a Section 7
report in accordance with the law,
and the legal advice is published.
So,
we waive privilege on that. So-
Thank you
... it's basically the same process as has been
since 1990. And I'm intending to do that, and I see it as a
critical I see it as a critical part of the attorney
function,
providing independent and free and frank advice to the
parliament about
rights issues.
So I did that on the-
Okay, we're going to get back to the-
On the honors and also the
man and woman bill.
Okay. So we've asked that question.
I want to get back to the budget, because it's what the session-
That isn't the bit that's in the budget.
No, really?
Lisa, that's in the budget.
It's not to do with PCO, but I'm happy to-
No, it's PCO as Attorney General.
Yeah. We're stretching it, guys. I'm going back here to Dr.
Sunan.
I'm happy to-
I was just going to make one little comment in addition to
that. I'm very sorry.
I hope it's in-
Please.
It's very, very quick. No, it's not in the budget, and I'll rule that out of order.
There's nothing to do with this, but I'm happy to answer.
Just one little comment, which is, and we mentioned this previous year's
estimates hearing with the previous attorney general as well, is often we don't
see
either the consistency report or the-- particularly the consistency report being
uploaded on the website prior to first reading of a bill, just to
make sure that-
Well, no, you do. If I issue a Section seven report. Oh, I see what you mean.
Yeah.
If it was a Section seven report, you have to by-
You have to, but the inconsistent report, sometimes it doesn't happen.
Oh, we can check that.
Just so you're aware.
That's a bit untidy. We can-
That's just for your awareness.
We can find that out.
Thank you.
No, you got
two minutes left. No, I'm just ruling that out.
No, I can take it. Come on.
Two minutes left, guys. Have you got any other questions?
On this point that the minister's-
Right, this will be your last question
... responding to.
Okay, good.
What's the minister's view on significant amendments that are made
to bills and the fact that we don't currently have an updated Section seven-
Yeah. Well-
... on those?
Yeah. It's
a trade-off, right?
There
have been various proposals over the years to put in place requirements for
equivalent to Section seven reports based on large APs.
The problem is
how would it practically work?
It would result in efficiency loss, obviously.
So it's just a trade-off conversation. Parliament hasn't seen fit to do that yet.
There's probably a case for it.
But I think there's probably a case for a standing human rights committee of
parliament, too. To take Section seven report
seriously, there's a way to do that.
There's been various proposals with that over the years as well.
So, those are all issues for standing orders committee.
Right. I'm going to thank the minister, and I'm going to thank the officials.
PCO, I'm going to just take the opportunity to thank PCO for what they do
for all select committees, but particularly the Justice-
Justice
... Select Committee.
Yes, you've been very busy here.
Smooth operation as well.
You must know these guys quite well when you staffed it.
Staffed it.
Yeah.
All right. Cool. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Kathy's one of our favorites.
Oh, there you go. Good feedback.
Yeah. Thank you.
Right. Lindsay, are you going to come to the front?
It's been a while.
Sorry?
It's been a while since I've seen you.
Oh, no.
Welcome back anytime, Dave.
Taking the next.
Right. Lindsay, you going to come-
Back and saying no. Come on in. Okay.
Sometimes the point is that it's not in the budget.
General.
Sometimes that's the point.
General. You can't ask that.
Officially welcome. Officially welcome.
Yeah. Hey.
How are
you?
Good. You didn't have to.
No. So, oh.
Did you bring it?
Yes, he has to bring his ski goggles. There we go.
Now, Minister, nice to have you here.
Good to be here, Mr. Chair.
Hopefully, you know we're talking about corrections, but I presume you do.
Yes.
We have got you for an hour.
So you've done the drill many times before.
So hopefully we'll just have a short introduction and then-
Yeah
... we'll get into the questions.
Yeah, I know I'm a bit late, so we can go catch up that time.
No, 3:05's perfect time.
But, yeah, so thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you to the committee.
So my name's Mark Mitchell. I'm the Minister of Corrections.
With me, I've got Rachel Leota,
who is our Corrections Chief Executive.
She has stepped into the role with Jeremy going to
MCERT.
Mm-hmm.
She already had a lot of experience as our National
Commissioner in Corrections and, but she's come in at a time
where we've got a lot going on.
And she's doing a fantastic job, so good to have her up here with me.
And the other thing that I've brought here is,
I'm going to make some quick opening remarks, but Roe is just sort of wondering if
these were for him.
But what they are is they're called, the police have got
police merit awards,
and they're awarded to police officers who-
He's got three
... you know, display outstanding service.
In Corrections, I really wanted to introduce a Corrections
Merit Award, and so that has just been delivered in the last three or four months.
And
Rachel has had two ceremonies,
which I'll sort of refer to, I think, in my opening remarks.
But
now it means that our corrections officers can be recognized for that work.
They can display them on their uniform, and they can wear them at formal events and
things like that.
Can you, would you pass them around?
So yeah, just pass them around.
Yeah, pass them down.
Yeah. I broke that box. That's all right.
Yeah, cool.
I don't know how you get the blame for that.
It's estimates, not show and tell.
Gonna...
Show tell.
Oh, Gerald.
You know what? I'm going to take exception to that
remark.
Yes.
Show some respect for our corrections officers.
That's right.
You know? I've said that I've-
You're here to be scrutinized
... I've already said that I'd give you extra time, so just show a little bit of
respect.
That's right.
Wow.
Right. So, Minister, please.
Yeah, so
looking forward to the new fiscal year, there are four ministerial
priorities that remain clear and at the top of my mind.
These are to increase prison capacity, ensure staffing levels
remain proportional to the prison population, improve staff safety,
and reduce re-offending through effective rehabilitation.
Mm.
The government is committed to community safety and restoring law and order.
We are unapologetic about making sure that those who need to be in
prison are in prison, and I'm resolute in ensuring Corrections has
the resources to manage the increasing prison population.
Since November 2023,
Corrections has added 2,837 beds,
with another 240 beds expected by the end of this year.
This builds on the government's support for the accelerated capacity program
at Hawkes Bay Regional Prison and on the commitment to invest in the expansion of
capacity at Waikeria Prison and the Christchurch Men's Prison.
We've also had the highest number of corrections officers on the front line.
That is 4,774 in
service at 31 May 2026,
with the government investing directly into the front line through subsequent
budgets as well. This includes an additional 710 staff in
this year's budget, with 471 of these being corrections officers.
We have noted an increase in the number of prisoners associated with trans-national
organized crime
Whose approach continues to be attempting to get what they want through influence
and bribery. We have seen recently how persistent and unnerving these
prisoners are.
Corrections has placed significant focus on integrity and ensuring that staff
have the tools and knowledge to identify and then report when they are
approached by prisoners or members of the community attempting to manipulate them.
I wholeheartedly support this work and know that Rachel and her team have a
plan to respond and strengthen Corrections' training and
oversight of this key area.
Staff safety has also been a fundamental priority.
Corrections staff deserve to return home safely at the end of every shift,
and we want to do everything we can to make sure that happens.
That is why I led the Corrections Amendment Bill through the House last year, which
included introducing new intelligence provisions, expanding body
imaging searches to reduce contraband, and improving disciplinary
processes.
In addition, I'm now leading the changes through the Corrections, Management of
Prisoners and Prisoners Property Amendment Bill, which will ensure Corrections has
a robust legislative framework to manage the small number of
prisoners who pose an extreme risk to prison and public safety.
Together, these changes will help support a more secure prison system and
give frontline staff the tools and protections they need to improve their
safety.
Finally, while imprisonment can be an important means to restoring law and order
and keeping the community safe, effective rehabilitation also plays a
critical part in reducing re-offending and preparing people for successful
reintegration into society upon release.
That is why the government has passed legislation to ensure that remand convicted
prisoners are provided with rehabilitation that addresses the drivers
of their offending.
I want to finish by acknowledging the professionalism, resilience, and
dedication of Corrections staff across the country.
They work in some of the most challenging and complex environments, and what
they do is essential to maintaining public safety and
supporting better outcomes for all New Zealanders.
To recognize that amazing work, these staff,
we now have the very first Corrections Merit
Awards, and they are presented earlier this year to recognize those staff who have
made significant contributions across the organization at a
local, regional, and national level.
The first presentation organized five staff involved in the tragic assault
of a staff member at Wanganui Community Corrections last year,
including the senior practitioner, who was the victim of the assault.
He was stabbed several times and was very, very fortunate to survive that attack.
The second presentation was to a staff member who, while off duty, stepped into a
situation where a teenage boy was being assaulted.
She put her own safety on the line to protect the boy, someone she had
never met.
These are only two stories
of the amazing people Corrections has working for them, and I'm immensely proud as
their minister to continue supporting them wholeheartedly in their work.
Happy to take any questions.
Right. So we're going to start with Dr Tracey McKay.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you, Minister.
And thank you for outlining that list, that stratified list of priorities.
I did note that reoffending has jumped down the list a little bit.
Corrections' stated strategic direction is to reduce reoffending and
reduce Māori overrepresentation.
The budget remains heavily weighted toward prison
capacity and custodial services.
How can you assure this committee that
the budget is reducing future prison demand rather than simply
funding more prisons, a larger prison system?
Well, future prison demand is dependent
on a whole of government approach and society.
It's not Corrections. Corrections have to make sure that when people come
into their custody, that they look after them and
that they provide the rehabilitation that's identified and giving them, in
my view as incoming minister, giving them real life skills that they can use
when they leave prison and giving them a much better chance of being able to
reintegrate and make good decisions.
So,
Corrections has got a role to play, but in terms of lowering the-- We want to see
less people coming into prison. No one wants their prisons.
No one wants to see people coming into prison.
But the fact of the matter is,
human nature means that we can get people that hurt other people.
And when they do, we need to have somewhere to put them to try and rehabilitate
them so that when they come back out, they stop hurting people, they stop doing bad
things.
Yeah. So Corrections' written questions
say that there's no new services, functions, or outputs in this
budget. If there are no new services, so
what
is materially changing the trajectory of that
reoffending, remand growth, Māori overrepresentation, women's
imprisonment, if there's no new services or you think in this particular budget-
What's materially changing for the country is that it's safer.
Because we've got people-
What's materially changing in this budget to-
Well, so let me finish. If you let me finish.
What's materially changing is, number one, the country is safer,
and Corrections has got a critical part to play in that.
Every day, they turn up to work, and they keep our country safe.
And we're making a heavy investment into making sure that they can continue to do
that. We changed the legislation so that they're able to deliver
rehabilitation to
prisoners on remand. That couldn't happen before.
We've made those changes. We think it's important that we actually try to
deliver programs to people while they are on remand.
And Corrections are continually evaluating and looking at the programs that they're
delivering and making changes. But Rachel might want to speak to that as well.
Thank you, Minister.
We will continue to look at our suite of interventions.
We're very much focused around evidence-based and ensuring that
actually the right interventions are going to make the biggest difference.
I would note that a number of roles, rather than just services, absolutely
contribute to reducing reoffending.
So we've got a range of different roles there to support the increase in the
prison population that will be absolutely addressing
reducing reoffending as an important outcome for the department.
So the Budget
2026 includes funding to extend rehabilitation
reintegration to people on remand, as you've just said.
But the
Corrections' written answers say that remand statistics aren't yet
available because the eligibility criteria and available interventions
are still being finalized. So I suppose, can you just tell us a little bit more
about how can you assure this committee now that the funding
in Budget '26 is sufficient if you haven't yet finalized the
eligibility or what
interventions will be available, and actually haven't really been able to
provide much information from Budget '24,
with regard to who's actually accessing these?
It runs the risk of being something that looks good on paper but isn't actually
happening in real life.
Yes. Budget '24 did invest
in exactly what the minister said when the law was changed to allow for
rehabilitation programs access to people on remand.
Initially, there was a lot of assessment to see what the actual needs
were, and how we could address that.
Obviously, with people on remand, we do have people having to still attend
court and various other appointments, which
sometimes means that the type of rehabilitation that we have
for them isn't always directly suitable.
So we might have a program, for example, that's called a closed program, where
you're sort of set and you're staying in there, and we can't have people just
coming in, in those
interim moments over time. But we have got a range of programs that are
suitable for people in those situations, and we're continuing to
provide opportunities for people to participate in those.
So, Minister, are you satisfied with the level of uptake of the-
It's a great news story. They-
Was it-
So until we came into government, prisoners on
rehabilitation could not legally get-
I agree
...
on remand, and now they're getting it, and Corrections are doing the right thing.
The way they approach everything, they're doing it in a very measured way.
They're working out how they can actually deliver programs that will be meaningful
and achieve something, and they're rolling that out, and the funding is there to be
able to do that.
Okay.
Right, last question.
So can I just ask one more then? So the $43 million
reprioritization and service risk.
So your written questions say Corrections has around 43 million of
baseline cost pressures that are expected to require
some sort of internal reprioritization,
and that changes to services are
still being finalized. There's quite a few things still being finalized.
So what services, programs, or functions do you
anticipate, Minister, would be at risk due to that
reprioritization? Essentially, I'm asking you, can you rule out that there's going
to be any cuts or delays to things like rehabilitation,
reintegration, education,
or is it going to be the capital project that potentially-
No, there's a commitment from Corrections on both capital projects and massive
capital projects.
Do you have any idea where the $43 million might come from?
Well,
what we're doing with the public service is that
we are making sure that our public service is modern,
it's fit for purpose, and it's able to provide the services that Kiwis need
in the next decade, two decades. And that is a process the whole of government is
going through, and Corrections have been quite simply outstanding in the way that
they have recognized what the government's priorities.
They've recognized the situation that we're in as a country, and they've responded
to that. Not this year, they responded to that in 2023,
'24.
So do we know-
Right. No.
Do we know where-
I'm going to Tamatha Paul now.
We'll come back to you, Tracy, but we'll do Tamatha Paul.
It's a really answer.
My questions in this line are all related to wāhine Māori in prison.
Yeah.
That's probably one of the biggest disgraces within the Corrections
system or within the justice system more broadly.
Yeah.
What I wanted to understand is,
so I know that Hōkai Rangi is one of Corrections'
organizational outcomes that you're striving towards.
Yes.
And obviously, you've made all these provisions within the budget for the growing
prison population. I don't think any demographic in Corrections is growing
faster than Māori women. At the same time,
the Ombudsman's inspections has shown that, for
Māori women, there are deficits in contact with their tamariki.
There is limited access to rehabilitation and kaupapa Māori programs
and unfit prison facilities themselves.
So-
Okay, the question?
So the question is, and the context is actually important.
No, I get that. So-
And I am doing what you asked, which is to reference it in the budget.
Yeah. That's fine.
Is,
what money are you going to put aside to
deal with some of those issues I just outlined, knowing that some of those aspects
might be a reason why people continue to offend and end up back in the same system
over and over again?
Yes. So just at a very high level, we've been talking about this recently, and
Rachel is the incoming chief executive.
This is one of the things that she's really focusing on.
She can talk more about that, is our
female prison population and
what other options and things should we be looking at and what can we do
around that. So full recognition, but there is a lot of work going on.
There's a lot of work going on in the rehabilitation space.
And I see that we've got our two most experienced people in Corrections here that
are on the front lines dealing with this sitting next to me.
So maybe I'll hand over to-
Yeah
... Rachel initially, and then, yeah.
Thank you, Minister.
Wāhine Māori
imprisonment rates are extraordinarily high, as you've already pointed out,
and particularly around remand as well.
So this is definitely an issue. It has been growing.
Sometimes it sort of reduces a little bit over time, but it is an area that
the department is absolutely focused on.
We have had a woman strategy that's been in operation for a number
of years, which has seen an increased number- Of, uh,
offense-focused programmes and for wāhine Māori in particular, um, and we
are seeing, um, significant uptake on that.
Um, I think it would be great if I can introduce, um, Kim Grierson,
who's our deputy commissioner for, uh, the Women's Prison Network,
and also, uh, Hiraweni Te Kohu, uh, Te Koha rather, uh, who is our
Te Ngā Tangata Hinerangi, um, who can speak a little bit more specifically
to the matters that you've raised.
Kia ora, committee members. Um, thank you for the introduction, Rachel,
and to answer your question, Tamatha, um, we are
absolutely focused on that rising woman's population,
particularly for wāhine Māori. I feel incredibly
proud to work for an organization that has lifted and shifted,
uh, the Woman's Prison Network out on its own.
I-- It's a role I take very seriously.
Um, I feel very privileged as the kaitiaki of that role.
Um, to address some of the reflections that you have said, by the very
nature of only having three prison sites plus a
satellite site at Waikeria, it does mean that our women are
more displaced, just because of the sheer number of prison sites
that we have available. So there has been a, a very concerted
effort of making sure that contact with tamariki and
whānau is a priority for each of those three sites.
Now, for some, being able to visit may not be a possibility, but
we make sure that we've got good AVL, good Teams connectivity.
We've put in additional phones so that women can ring home and stay
connected to those that they love.
Um, and so yes, that is, that is one of the focus
areas that we are committed to. Um, in regards to the
rehabilitation and reintegration side, uh, one of the
things, um, that we are really keenly focused on, because we are a smaller
network, is making sure that the suite of services available are...
We take a network approach to that.
Our two smaller sites, just through economies of scale, make it very
hard for us to run everything at one site.
So what we do is we lift it up, we look as a network and say, "What can we offer
at, at each particular site?" And then be really intentional with our women's
pathways around where we move them so that those
rehabilitat- rehabilitative needs are met.
Do you want to say anything? Yeah.
Oh, if I may.
Yes, please. Yeah.
Chair. Tena koutou, committee. Um, to the member's question,
um, the data's telling us that near on half
the women in our prisons are remanded into custody.
So to the minister's point, when we can have strong-
... uh, rehabilitative offerings to that cohort of women who otherwise aren't being
supported on their rehabilitation journey, uh, the sooner we
can start to move those numbers with those, uh, wāhine raised a
question. So that's a big focus for us, given the size of the remand
population, and Māori women as a percentage of that.
I was lucky enough to meet with, uh, two groups of Māori women at Auckland
Regional Women's, uh, Corrections Facility, and when the question was posed to
them, "What does being Māori mean to you?" Within-- Uh, unanimously,
they said, "It means everything to us." So to your point, the more we can
tailor programmes that resonate with who they are, but that are
also clearly connected to their rehabilitative journey, uh, the, the
more we'll be able to make serious inroads into those numbers.
And just-
Yeah, keep going.
Oh, yeah. I've just got two more subs on if that's all right.
Yeah, you go. I want, I want your last say as well.
So, so one thing, and this might be more of a political question for the minister,
but, um- So, but on that point about remand, uh,
most wāhine Māori, 66% of wāhine Māori are in custody
for nonviolent offenses. So it's like, what kind of
rehabilitation are you gonna give these women? You know, what do you say to them?
"Don't be poor"? You know, like, they're in there for shoplifting.
The number one charge for Māori women is
shoplifting, and surely these are people that we can all agree shouldn't be locked
up for shoplifting, you know? And even, and, and you might say, well,
they might be recidivist, they might've, um, h- it might've been a real serious,
um-
But Corrections is responsible.
And then-- I know it's Corrections. I know it's Corrections.
Um,
when it comes to the disproportionality on those charges
between Māori women and non-Māori women,
they can explain about half of that on recidivism and
the seriousness of the offending.
But 54% of that is unexplained, and this is why I've
gone on about, about this to you all term, Minister, about systemic
bias and systemic racism, whether that's in the police or Corrections.
Um, how do you explain that? And is that really a good use of taxpayers'
dollars to be locking up people who have shoplifted a few items from a
dairy?
Well, nu- number one, the judges decide that.
Mm-hmm.
So that's a judicial decision. So Corrections have got nothing to do.
Uh, so-
Have you advised the Ministers of Courts-
Well, as-
... and Justice on this matter?
Well, as, as you know, there's, um, there's a separation of powers, which is
important for our democracy. And, and so I don't get to advise or
comment on what the judiciary do at all.
Well, I meant the Minister of Justice.
All, all, all that we can do as, as, as make, as lawmakers is, is, is
change laws and make laws that we then hope that the, that judiciary will
actually understand the intent of the Parliament, and they'll apply them.
But, um, so Corrections d- has nothing to do with who they
receive. They have a r- but when they receive people, they take that
responsibility seriously. As you heard in terms of- Okay.
You, Tamatha, one more, because I've got lots of subs on this.
Can he finish what he was saying?
Well, I think he's finished. No, I ju- I ju-- and I'm not trying to diminish the
point that you're making. I think we, we get the point you're making.
But the one thing that I do want to say to you is this,
don't diminish any type of offending, because even
recidivist shoplifters-
Mm
... if you look at small and medium sized business owners,
cash flow is everything to them to be able to pay, meet their payroll, um,
commitments. And shoplifting, um, is, is, is
taking away Cash flow for them and their employees.
Totally.
So please don't diminish the-
Well, the thing is, Minister, there are a range of different options available to-
Judge
... every single offender.
I agree with you, but you were trying to-
Imprisonment isn't the solution to everything
... you were trying to make the proposition that it was shoplifting, and I can tell
you now that-
But no, it is. It is
... that it might-
That's what the facts say.
Yes, I know, but you were trying to diminish it by saying shoplifting is not a
serious offense.
It's just that someone like that have to be held in custody, because custody-
That is up-
... is keeping people out of the community.
Yes. So,
and the point that I'd make to you is if you go back and if you have a look at the
sentencing decisions that are made through the courts, often if they're
dealing with property offenses, unless it's a very big and a very serious one,
normally there's repeat property offenses that then will require or will
get a custodial sentence.
Okay, I've got two supplementaries. The first one from Arena Nagplan.
Good afternoon, Minister, and officials.
Just with respect to the rehabilitation taking place with our women,
what are the... If you could name the top three,
off the top of your head, of issues that they need rehab with.
Is it drugs, alcohol,
sexual violence?
I can do this as a combat.
Okay.
Kia ora,
.
It's hard to be exact about the needs that
the women are presenting either on remand
or when sentenced. We know pre-sentence, having suitable
addresses to be bailed to-
I think you have a supplement
... are an upfront barrier. When we get into the rehabilitative
space to the data
that the member has presented,
by and large, the
single largest type of offending is around
dishonesty offenses.
So having
the ability to have rehabilitative options that focus
in on the kind of financial pressures, the sorts of
triggers that lead to the behaviors of that type of offending,
will be important. I'd have to overlay and say,
while gang affiliation and related histories is low for
women relative to the men's estate, for Maori women, it's still four
times higher than all others.
Right. Now I'm going to a supplementary from Tracy-
Madam Chair.
I was just going to add to that.
Oh, sorry. Sorry.
The other part to consider, too, is alcohol and other drugs.
So we do see complexity, particularly for
women coming into custody.
So it's really important that we are able to support them with that
focus. And that's the importance, too, of having a suite of programs available
because it will depend on the type of offending to what rehabilitative
program we offer them.
Just a quick supplementary.
Okay.
And if you don't mind, so when you say drugs and other drugs,
what are the main that come to your mind that you see in
your work?
Drugs that-
Type of substances.
What type of substances?
Oh, I'm very sorry. I couldn't go into that.
Okay. I'm going to Dr. McLennan.
Fully understand that you don't always
have a say in who comes through the door, so to speak, but with the recidivism
rate-
We don't have any say.
Well, with the recidivism rate being as high as it is, you do have a say for the
people that circle back around. But with respect to the women's population, which
is a really sharp-
Yeah
... rise, all of a sudden it raises two things.
One, is there anything specific in this budget 2026 that's
funding that's directed specifically to Wahine Maori or
any women's initiatives? And two,
it does raise the issue of capacity.
So you've mentioned there's
already obviously a satellite.
Yeah.
But if you could answer the first one maybe.
No, they're really good questions, but I mean-
Is there anything in this budget-
I think-
... knowing that this is a problem
... it's just been covered off. I think that a lot of what Corrections are
currently doing and planning to do was covered off in the previous question.
But-
But there's no specific-
If you want them to go over again what they're doing, then-
Oh, no, I just want you to-- I just want you to-
Yeah, no, definitely capacity, but obviously-
Is there a specific initiative or how will we know?
Yeah.
Because there's a potential here that this just embeds this
disproportionality into the wider system.
If this has been a sudden incline, maybe we can kind of sort it sooner rather than
later.
I think that's a fair question. It's not absolutely transparent,
right?
No.
And I think that's what the member's asking.
Yes.
And can you-
In terms of capacity.
And how the money's been spent.
Yeah.
And in what areas specifically. I think that's what the member's getting at.
Yeah, Rachel can cover that off.
Yes. So, the investment in capacity, in Corrections obviously
covers all demands, right?
Mm-hmm.
So we have,
and we've got all different types of demographics coming in.
We've got sometimes young people as well, which we need to keep separate.
We've got people with mental health needs that we need to keep in a particular way
for their safety. And obviously, talking about women.
So our capacity investment is across the board, and we will be making decisions
that do meet the needs of the forecasts as they are being
presented. So, whilst we don't have a specific breakdown line item,
it is absolutely an area that we will be investing in.
And much like
Kim and Hedemani have explained, we've got a lot of other
initiatives already in the pipeline to be thinking about.
But nothing new.
Well, I think we iterate regularly.
As we've got
more relationships that we want to be building in the community, so a big
protective factor is actually having stable housing on release from
prison. So those reintegrative needs are just as equally important as
the rehabilitative ones as well. And that is definitely an area that we are
committed to being working with partners on, for sure.
Okay. We're going to go to Mr. Waititi, who's been waiting patiently.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you, Minister.
I just want to pick up on the Orairangi
kaupapa. And I just want to, this'll be a straight, my first question will be
straight. How much
are you or have you invested in Orairangi in regards to
improving public safety, reducing reoffending, and especially Maori
over-representation?
The numbers of Māori incarceration rates, actually in the last 10, 20
years, hasn't decreased. They've increased.
And your spending on capital works in regards to building more beds tells
me
it ain't going to improve, it's going to get worse.
So I want to know how much is being spent on Hōkai Rangi to ensure that there is
some tailored Māori programs out there for
what you're trying to achieve, which is Māori over-representation in the prison.
64% wāhine Māori
make up the female prison population,
and
53% to 54% of the male prison population are Māori.
I've got a huge concern that there's no reduce
in the numbers.
Okay, let's ask a question.
But what is actually are you investing in Hōkai Rangi or any other program that'll
tell me, that'll give us confidence that we're going to reduce over-representation
of Māori in prison?
Yeah. Well, Hōkai Rangi is the department
strategy first and foremost. So everything in those three outcomes in terms of
public safety, reducing re-offending, and reducing Māori
over-representation is what the organization does.
Absolutely, there is more that we need to be doing to be focusing in on
Māori re-offending, as you say.
We need to be thinking about some different ways of engaging.
We-
Can you tell me what are those? So you're saying you're thinking about different
ways. What are some of those different ways?
Yeah.
Hōkai Rangi was implemented in 2019.
Yes.
And it's now 2026.
And I need to know what those different ways are to start-
Yep. And we've got a range of different
programs specific, and I would say that actually Māori
participation in all of our core rehabilitation programs is
significant, and Māori do pretty well actually in those
programs comparatively to other demographics.
So there is that investment there.
I've just come back to Corrections just four weeks
ago. I've been away for nearly four years, and I think there's a lot more that we
must and should be doing with regard to focusing in on reducing
over-representation for Māori. And Herewini and his
wider team have got a range of things that they are thinking about that actually
can start to shift that dial. Herewini?
Kia ora.
There you go.
And to the member's question,
some of the most recent things, and this is not to
avoid the fundamental numbers that you pointed to in your
question, the Māori prison population has continued in
absolute numbers and in proportionate terms to increase,
or certainly not to bend
in a positive way. Having said that, we've done a major
overhaul of our key
reintegration service out of gate.
It went to market earlier this year.
It's pleasing to be able to say that of our 11 operating regions,
seven of those out of gate service provision arrangements will be
through Māori organizations, either as sole lead or
co-lead. So from a service provision,
understanding the people we are working with and
developing practices that harmonize with their rehabilitative and reintegrative
journey, it's good to know that we've got seven of eleven of our regions the
service provision will be led by Māori organizations.
And the profile of Māori organizations for our contracted services is
really healthy, and they're coming through an RFP process and winning those service
opportunities on merit, which is what we need to be able to demonstrate.
On rehabilitation, our numbers are showing that over or since Hōkai
Rangi, 2019, maybe before that,
if we can get rehabilitation programs
available to Māori in our prisons, the participation
rates are higher than everybody else.
The completion rates are higher than everybody else.
With the exception of psychological services, where the completion rates are on par
with everybody else. So there are some pleasing things to look at, but the
fundamental maths of all of that good activity leading to a bend in
the numbers, we're not there yet. And to minister's and Rachel's
point, we have to sweat that harder to figure out where we can be stronger.
Thank you, Herewini. Just a sup on that.
When will we see a bend in the numbers?
Because like I said, in the last 10, 20, there's been an increase of Māori
representation in prison. Hōkai Rangi has been in
the processes for a long time. I want to know, minister,
and to your staff, will there be some heavier investment
into those particular spaces? And I heard you talk about
psych services, mental health services.
We had 20-odd
workers arrested for corruption
that would play a huge part on the mental health of the people who
are in prison at this particular time.
And the impacts of the stuff that was being brought in has an impact on
that. I want to know that in terms of public safety, but also public
trust
in the organization, is that there are things being put in place to
ensure that we can start bending those numbers.
But it doesn't help when
public trust now is at an all-time high because of some of the other things that
have been happening. 20 staff is a lot.
Yeah. So obviously, we've got a
big focus, and as the incoming minister, I had a big focus on recognizing what the
global trends are.
We've been targeting transnational crime and organized crime groups.
We've been targeting gangs. We've got a lot of gang leaders now inside our prison
system. And with the global trend is that they're
well-financed, they're well-resourced, and they
attack the integrity of our corrections officers.
And
the good thing is that our health check shows the fact that we
are taking action, we are identifying it, and there's action being taken.
And I don't want to get those matters now before the courts, and it's alleged
accusations. So we've got to let that natural justice happen there.
But I hope you can see that as a government, we've been very proactive,
both police and corrections, to make sure that we protect our corrections officers,
we protect our people in the corrections system,
and that we're targeting the real problem, and that is transnational crime and the
organized crime groups. In terms of getting on top of that- The question
that you asked is how do you bend the curve down?
Yep, Corrections has got a role without a doubt in terms of delivering
rehabilitation, identifying what works, yep.
Reintegration.
But the real thing, honestly, Rory, is
the support they get when they come out.
Reintegration.
Yes.
Yeah.
The family support, the wider hapū and iwi support,
the community support, all of that sort of stuff.
Should we put some of the $477 million into that?
Instead of building more beds.
Well, I'm a huge fan. If you ask me, we can sit down and have a philosophical
talk about this, but I feel that in terms of Māori
overrepresentation in our criminal justice system, the biggest players and the most
influence are iwi and hapū themselves in
trying to get people to realize and embrace the opportunities they have in our
country instead of making the bad decisions.
Yeah, definitely. Yeah.
No one wants to see anyone come into our criminal justice system.
Right. Now I'm going back to Tamatha Paul. She's only had three questions.
Yeah.
Right?
Thank you.
So this one-
No, that's the new. Let's move on.
Yep, yeah, I'm going to go onto minimum entitlements.
Yeah, thank you.
So obviously there's heaps of money in here for
the growing prison population. I guess what I'm keen
to know about is the quality of that custody and
making sure that every person who moves through the
Corrections network receives their minimum entitlements.
And obviously at the end of last year, your predecessor had to go to the High
Court because Corrections was not meeting minimum entitlements, which
builds on the lack of minimum entitlements afforded to people during
COVID, which potentially understandable.
But anyway,
what confidence can you give us that within this big appropriation,
every prisoner will have their minimum entitlements met?
Well, I can't give you a cast iron
assurance that every minimum entitlement will be met because we have
got a growing prison population
that brings additional challenges every day in terms of managing that.
But we have a world-class corrections service that is able
to do that.
My focus and my priority as incoming minister was staff safety,
and that will remain the priority, is that we've got outstanding Kiwis that turn
up every day and do an extremely difficult job that
most of us probably couldn't do in a very, very challenging environment with
some of the most difficult, complex and violent people that
society has. So we will always strive and always try
to do our best around delivering minimum entitlements.
We've got
such a transparent system that you've got people that go in there and audit and
check that and hold us to account, and Corrections are very good at being able to
actually identify and see what changes need to be made.
But if you're asking for a cast iron assurance that every minimum entitlement
will be met,
no, I cannot do that. And I'll reinforce
again that in our Corrections system, that my priority is quite
simply staff safety.
Can I ask, what is your understanding of minimum
entitlements? What do you think they are?
Well, it's pretty self-explanatory.
It's
a set of entitlements that are deemed to be or put forward as being a
minimum set of
entitlements. And, by the way, Corrections will
often exceed and go beyond minimum entitlements.
That doesn't often get reported or that's not visible.
Yeah.
But that is often what they do.
But it's a set of standards that we work to, and Corrections
do that in good faith.
Perhaps Rachel, you could expand on that.
And there are a number of minimum entitlements that sort of also have a predication
of where reasonably practical. Obviously, one hour of
exercise in the open air is not one of those
ones that's where practicable. This is something that we must do or we must
accommodate. That's an area where we've really been focused.
As the minister said, and the vast majority of people
in New Zealand prisons will absolutely have an excess of one hour.
But there are a small number where that has been proven to be a little bit more
difficult for particular reasons regarding their own
safety and the safety risk that they have to others.
I would say, before I just pass over to Shaun Mason, who's our Commissioner for
Custodial Services,
that the budget is funding staffing
appropriately to manage the minimum entitlements, right?
So that is the most important thing that the government is doing.
So we are making sure that we have staff in order to facilitate minimum
entitlements. The minister, one of his priorities, of course, he's already
mentioned, is that fact we have appropriate staffing for the capacity that we have.
So that is the commitment that we have to ensure that we are doing that.
And Shaun, do you want to talk a little bit about what you've been doing around the
minimum entitlements, particularly related to one hour of exercise?
Absolutely. Good afternoon, committee.
Shaun Mason, Commissioner for Custodial Services.
There's a number of things we are clear on now, particularly
since the mandate master ruling in December,
and are therefore committed to ensuring that we're delivering minimum entitlements
every day. It's not without challenge.
There are a number of reasonable accommodations that we took prior to the
hearing and since,
to be able to accommodate changes with regimes and with
rosters and such like to ensure that the infrastructure and the regime are
coherent of one another.
One of the key aspects is improving our
record keeping. As the minister said, and as
Rachel said, there are a number of justifiable and lawful reasons as to why a
minimum entitlement
either
can't or won't be delivered.
But it's implicit upon
Corrections to ensure that our record keeping is accurate.
What's pleasing is that
since the ruling, there hasn't been any
systemic
non-compliance that's been issued, but
we As an executive leadership team, collectively, are
all dialed in on the importance of minimum entitlements being regarded
as a right and not a privilege.
To the extent where I personally,
just recently, have engaged every general manager, every deputy general
manager, every residential manager, and every senior advisor at every prison
in the country, to make it clear what the expectations were.
Prior to the Mandating Order, there was interpretations in practice.
It's very clear, and it's been made very clear to those operational leaders every
day. But just so I am clear, there will continue to be reasons why
minimum entitlements are lawfully not delivered.
Yeah, and that's the key.
Mm-hmm.
Hopefully. Like you say, there are reasons why sometimes it
can't be met, but that's an absolute minimum, and that's
tied to human rights.
Correct.
And you don't give up your human rights because you go to prison.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah.
Treats-
And treat, and people are treated with dignity and respect in our system.
We should be proud of that. So what can we-
Okay, we're going to go back to Dr Tracy McLennan. Hopefully something a bit new.
Yeah, and I had a couple more topics, but just in lieu of time, I might
skip ahead just in case I don't get the opportunity.
We've talked about the fact that this Budget 2026 is
mainly funding
prisons population growth and the requisite staffing that needs to go with that.
But community corrections is where many people can be
stabilized without
returning to custody.
Your written answers show, for instance, that Canterbury Community
Corrections had a 18.1% vacancy rate as of end
of March this year.
So how can the public have confidence that community
corrections, which is an incredibly important part of your portfolio,
is being resourced safely to manage people in the community when
we tend to talk a lot about prisons-
Yeah
... and not about
the emphasis that could be on community corrections-
Yeah
... and the work that they do. So can you just kind
of walk me through that? And I want to know what additional recruitment or
retention funding has been provided in this budget, Budget
2026-
Yeah, I'll-
... for probation officers and for community corrections.
I'll pass to, I'll pass to Rachel. Just re- very quickly, we've done, Corrections
have been outstanding in their recruitment pipeline.
And it's actually very hard to become a corrections officer.
But we've had pl- the, the, the campaigns that have been run have been very
successful. And at the moment, we've got very
low attrition rates.
Mm.
We were at, up around 11 to 12%. We're back down now to
7% attrition. But, yes, it's a demanding role.
And there's, and there's pressure on the labor force, but I'll let Rachel speak to
that.
Thanks, Minister.
And specifically to your question around probation officers, probation officers are
included in our frontline uplift that's been invested for this
year.
Mm-hmm.
Obviously, probation officers play a really important role,
both at the front end of a court process from a provision of advice to courts,
and obviously also on release for managing sentences-
Mm
... either based in the community or post-release.
There's been some fluctuations, I think, around probation numbers across the
country. But to the Minister's point, there's pretty, there's been
an, an improved
sort of attrition rate, particularly also for probation officers.
But I would just like to introduce Rebecca Pell, who's our Deputy Chief Executive
for People and Capability. And Rebecca can talk to you a little bit more about
our approach for recruitment around probation officers and ensuring
that actually we have got the, the right people where we need them.
Yeah. And anything else that's in Budget '26 that's relating to community-
Yeah
... provisions would be great.
Thank you for the question. So probably the main thing to note is
looking at the workforce numbers overall for our community correction staff,
they're pretty good.
Mm-hmm.
So there's some, of a total workforce of around
1,400 people,
there's only 12.5 actual vacancies.
So that's bo- funded boxes on our org chart for people to be recruited into.
That's a really low number.
Okay.
That doesn't take into account that there may be some people who are stepping up
into more senior roles or into project work to support transformation of
community corrections or other type work.
So in terms of recruiting there, we
forecast six months ahead. So we look at turnover, and we've, our pipeline
takes into account that we are looking at what our vacancies might be in six
months. So we're preparing our recruitment pipeline of people consistently and
constantly. Earlier this year, we launched a new recruitment campaign called The
Rail Job. The Rail Job profiles different roles, different frontline roles
across the organization to ensure that we are
representing the work that our staff do really accurately and really well, and
that's part of our efforts of ensuring that the people that we're attracting to
work for Corrections kind of have a good sense of what the role involves,
and also
get a sense of whether they are the right fit for that job.
So the pipeline is pretty good notwithstanding.
There will be some places or localities in New Zealand where,
on any given day, vacancy numbers may be higher or lower.
So what in Budget 2026
did you find...
What in Budget 2026 is there for community corrections specifically?
I don't have oversight of community corrections across-
Because that's the question.
Yeah. Yeah. So the, I haven't got the specific number, but within the 716 new
roles that were funded our Budget '26, a number of those were probation
officers. So they can give you those numbers.
Okay. We've got-
And, and I don't need the numbers. Just is there any initiatives?
Is there anything else apart from those-
There's more funding coming.
Sure.
We've got the answer coming here now.
Okay.
So I've just got some, some figures to hand.
So an additional 47 probation officers,
a portion of 21 program facilitators, and a portion
of 31 offender employment staff.
Okay. Thank you. And as the prison population growth- Tracks
above the funded baseline because it almost did
last year, didn't it? Or it did,
for a while. What is your personal level of
confidence that the current funding, staffing, and capital settings
are sufficient given the fluctuations we've seen in the forecast?
Got huge levels of confidence-
Mm
... in our corrections service.
No, I'm just talking about your level of funding.
Yes.
Yeah.
So with the level of funding, they're absolutely going to be able to deliver.
And you can see this is clearly a government that continues to put more funding
into corrections because it's a public safety initiative, and we'll
continue to do that.
Given you don't have any control-
Last question
... about who goes through the door, and you did, those justice trajectories-
No, we have to respond to the wider justice sector settings without a doubt
... those justice trajectories
And we are doing that, and they are doing that.
They've got some of the biggest infrastructure projects going.
And they are a very capable agency
that has got-
I'm not doubting that. I'm just wondering whether-
So yes, so that-
... there's sufficient funding
... and they've shown that they've got the ability to be able to deliver with the
funding that they have. And we've shown as a government that we'll continue to
invest into them if they need it.
Okay, we're going to something new from Jamie Gilbert.
Thank you, Minister.
Hi, Jamie.
The capital program going forward, there's considerable amount of money there, and
I'm interested in the redevelopment in Christchurch Men's
Prison.
Mm.
Now I'm interested to know your thoughts about public-private
partnerships. We've obviously-
Mm
... built our prisons. And I also just wanted to add,
recently went to the Auckland
South's Correction Facility and was very impressed by what's
delivered there.
Yes.
So going forward, is that the type of
facilities that we will see in New Zealand?
Yeah, and I visited the Hawkes Bay expansion last week and
again, just incred... With Katie Nerren as the local MP,
and just incredibly impressive
with how they're putting that together and the systems that they're
using.
A far more efficient way of actually delivering infrastructure-
Yeah
... that's cost effective as well.
And
Christchurch Men's is part of the overall pipeline and program
that we are working through cabinet processes with.
I can't talk to the details of that because it's commercially sensitive, of course.
But
that is a part of our overall investment into the
infrastructure network for corrections.
And-
And are you confident with obviously the maintenance of prisons, that we're
getting over that terrible hump of, I think
five years ago we were looking at a deterioration of
prisons, but all of a sudden we seem to be kind of getting to a point where we're
getting a lot of things redeveloped.
So the prison estate now, like I've been to most of our prisons, is something to be
proud of and impressive.
Yes.
We have got old infrastructure that is going to need replacing, and this is part of
the ongoing program that we have. It's not perfect by any stretch of the
imagination. I've got the same challenges with police as well.
But Rachel, did you have any comments online?
Yeah. Thanks, Minister. I was just going to say that we have a range of different
options when we think about the way that we want to manage construction.
PPPs are absolutely one of those and something that Corrections has been involved
in for many years now. But we do have to have a variety of
different methods depending on the type of facility that might be already in
existence, versus something that might be larger scale
and more developed, sorry, not more developed, but more standalone.
So,
we have a range of, obviously, as you said, you went to Auckland South Corrections
Facility, which is a design, build, maintain, and operate.
And more recently, the PPPs that we've been involved in have been around design,
build, and maintenance, and Corrections will operate those.
Although, with Christchurch, we've got a partner who will be,
yeah, doing our services, sorry, our maintenance services there.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
Right. We've got a supplementary from Tamsyn Owlett.
Oh, just on the prison facilities themselves.
There's a
new unit at Waikeria, or, well,
Corrections says it's part of Auckland Regional Women's Prison.
An existing unit.
Yeah.
To accommodate women.
Mm-hmm.
Are there plans to create
another women's prison, given they're all full?
Or what's the thinking there in terms of those prisons and corrections?
We're working through a range of options at the moment with regards
to women. As we spoke earlier in the conversation, we
want to think about all different ideas that we could be putting into place,
because we do think that there are things that we can do that might
assist with ensuring that we don't need to build a brand new
prison.
We have in the past used units on a satellite basis
over many years, at Waikeria in particular. So it's not completely unheard of.
And we've also used the top jail at Rimutaka Prison as well, so for
women. So these are not new concepts.
Okay. I've got one more supplementary on this topic, and then I'll go to Rima
Nakley.
So with that new, thank you, Mr. Chair, with that new infrastructure-only PPP,
which not everybody is
enamored with as
you've described, but with this new model in
Christchurch, what kind of assurance can you give us that there's actually any
value for money? Because we can't see under the hood.
We haven't really been able to have a look at any of the finer details.
No.
How do we know that in the long run we're not paying an arm and a leg?
No, most people are enamored because we're sort of going, we just delivered a new
police station too in Terradale, and we're going to modular.
Mm-hmm.
We're going to different ways of doing construction that's far more cost effective.
In a sense-
How cost effective will it be in the long run for Christchurch Men's Prison?
Well, but that is the approach we're taking in terms of
how do we...
The approach that we're taking is how do we deliver world-class infrastructure,
but at a more efficient way and at less cost.
So you're happy?
Which is ter-
Because all we can do is ask for your reassurance because we don't know what the
answer is.
I'm very happy. No, absolutely. I'm very happy.
I'm glad to say.
And I'm very happy to supply as much detail as I can-
Mm
... on Christchurch
And that is further down the line.
I just want to know, so good value for money is what I'm after.
Yeah.
That's right. And that's what we're-
Yes
... basing the market on, right?
Yeah.
Right.
Let's go to-
No, no, Trustee, we're on the same page on that one, Tracy.
I like to spend money. I want to know it's good value for money.
Good. I'm so glad we're all-
Aesthetic
... like saving taxpayers money.
Yeah. Yeah.
Right. Let's go to Rimynatley.
Yeah. Thank you.
New lines of questioning.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, Minister, although,
and Rachel, Corrections, as we know, deals with people that are serving
a criminal sentence, whether it's in prison or out in the
community.
Yeah.
And this increase in funding and substantial increase,
for this budget and
the budgets in this government,
would you say that the copupa behind the
reason for the increase of funding
essentially falls under the overall umbrella, which we seem to
see is a theme for this government of protecting victims
and preventing future victims of crime?
Because even though Corrections,
as I said, covers people that are serving a criminal sentence, that
overall objective.
Yeah. Well, Corrections has got a critical role to play in public safety,
obviously, in a whole range of different ways.
But yes, fundamentally, we've got a big focus on, inside the justice
system itself, we've got a big focus in terms of trying to make it
more efficient.
Work more quickly. They say the old saying, justice delayed is justice
denied.
So we're trying to get the whole system working together.
With the primary focus being a reduction of victims
of crime, right? And
so when everyone is joined up and everyone's motivated by that same thing, it
becomes pretty easy to see us working very well together,
amongst those
justice portfolios.
Yeah.
We've seen a reduction of 49,000 serious victims
of violent crime.
Yes, we have seen the prison muster increase, without a doubt.
But those two numbers, in my view, are directly linked, and I don't think
anyone in this room wants to see more victims of crime.
The human costs of that, the
economic cost of that, the cost for the country
is extraordinarily high. And so we are making that investment.
Yeah.
We are fundamentally our whole...
Obviously all the policies the government have introduced and worked on in this
term has had the victims at the heart of it, without a doubt.
Thanks, Minister.
Sorry, I'm going to jump in very quickly.
All right.
You know the costing on the modular stuff you're investing-
Yeah
... deep into New Zealand made stuff-
... just
looking at this, is it the same with you fellows' uniforms and what have you?
Or are
they all made here or-
What, modular?
Yeah, well.
Some of them could be. But are we spending in New
Zealand made stuff or are we buying from overseas, like-
Yeah, well-
... uniforms, hats, all of that type of stuff that-
Great question. Obviously we are looking for value for money,
when we're spending taxpayers money, as many of you have already
identified. But you may be aware that the Ministry of Business and
Innovation and Employment have just changed some of their procurement approaches
where it actually does
want to consider New Zealand based, the New Zealand economy and what
procurement can be doing to support that.
Yeah, because I think that's a question in regards to, yes, one is saving
taxpayer's money, but one is making sure that it goes back into our own economy.
Yeah.
Good.
So we're always-
Right. Now-
... looking at quality and value, right?
Yeah.
Now we've got four minutes left-
Yeah
... so we've got to make this count. We're back to Tracy McLennan.
Sorry, and I'm going to go really fast, and I don't mean for that to be
disrespectful-
No, no
... to this topic-
Yeah
... but we haven't touched on mental health.
Yes.
And I do want it to be noted.
Yeah.
And I will follow up with some written questions afterwards.
Yeah. I don't mind going a little bit over time, so that's just-
Okay. So,
we know that the
complexity of people ending up in the prison system is getting much, much more
complex.
Yeah.
Some would argue that the health system is failing some people with mental
health disorders, and we're ending up incarcerating them into a system-
Homeless
... that's not necessarily equipped to deal with it.
Yeah.
Have you done any work on quantifying the cost and operational impact
of using prison staff, ISU beds, one-on-one
observations, all of that sort of stuff because the health service lacks-
Okay, good question
... capacity and what are you doing?
Right.
And budget 2026 to get to grips.
Even better.
Well, have you got anyone coming after us?
Because-
No, we've got a very full... We've got to stop at
four minutes, so let's get it.
Okay. I'll see if they give me the time, but it sounds like we won't.
Yeah. All right.
So really quickly, look, totally recognize the issue you're raising.
Mm.
There's been a significant amount of work done between Corrections, Police, and
Health-
Mm-hmm
... to identify what we need to do to be able to provide the services, especially
to forensic mental health patients.
And at the moment, we do care for quite a few of those.
Mm.
Corrections do a very good job of it.
But I think we'd all agree that they should be in a mental health facility
rather than Corrections. But let me hand over to Lee, and
he'll be able to give you a lot more detail on it.
You've got more chance of speaking to the minister perhaps-
Let's go, Lee
... than I have, so I'll leave that with you.
Lee, let's go.
Thanks.
Good afternoon, committee. So it is obviously a known issue around capacity
across the forensic mental health system.
Any given time, we've got around 35 to 50 individuals in
custody who are either awaiting placement or awaiting placement for assessment.
Mm-hmm.
Now, we work very closely with the health system, with Health NZ and the
Ministry of Health around how we can work more joined up in
prioritizing those with the most acute needs to use those
quite scant resource in that environment.
There is a longer-term program alongside Health NZ and the Ministry of Health
around working demand modeling and capacity, but I'll let
the health organizations talk to that.
Mm-hmm.
Our focus at the moment is we've got to understand any capacity or capital bills in
that space will take time.
Mm-hmm.
So there will be a period where we've got to manage those transitional placements
until that capacity matches the demand within our system.
So we're doing all we can to ensure that identification's early.
We're working with our partners across the sector to get services within prisons,
and the placement within prisons is safe and supported across the...
And that may mean moving around the country to prisons with
better facilities and better responsive outcome.
Yeah.
So it's very front of mind and very active piece of work that-
And Health are working really closely with us and are responding to that area.
Good.
And just one example we have-
Budget 2026
... one example that we have seen improvement on is at Manukau Corrections Facility
where the number of forensic
people in prison with forensic needs, we've halved the wait list
going into mental health.
Right. Last question, Tracy.
Yeah.
Last question.
I was just going to say, so in terms of budget 2026,
If the prison population's going up and the complexity's going up again,
is anything going to give if it's not funded properly?
Yeah.
What gives first?
Well, that example is a classic one, is the work that Lee has been doing leading
along with health. We've had the prison population going up now for two years.
But none of these services are up for reprioritization.
Well, they were still able to deal with reduced
demand inside our corrections system.
And none of these services are up for reprioritization as part of the 43 million?
No.
You can give your...
100%.
Yep.
Yeah.
Can I ask a question just on this, very last question.
Are you made aware whether people
have
mental health issues? Is that an important thing for you?
Or
when a prisoner turns up at your prison, are you
aware and can you find out whether they do have mental health issues
quickly?
I think the question's a little more complex than that, with all respect.
We really want to get in a place where if someone, for example, is subject to a
community treatment order and a police officer responds to that, that they get
visibility of that at the point of intervention.
That when they get to the court, that that is available.
And as we've got
health and staff and liaison nurses in the courts, that sort of information
becomes available. If they do eventually make it into custody, this is where we
work very closely with our partners, because obviously we operate on different
systems, to bring those closer together.
So the ideal situation is that we have shared databases, but that is a future state
as we see information technology develop.
But right now, it's that immediate contact, that local relationships, and those
MDTs at the sites that get that information within hours, worst
case, next day of reception.
Good. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair.
Right. I'd like to thank the minister.
I'd like to thank all corrections staff.
I want to say to all the corrections staff, you do a wonderful job
keeping New Zealand safe.
Thanks.
So I just want to publicly acknowledge you.
Thank you very much.
Appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate it. Thank you.
You almost got my third top.
You better check that award in there,
minister.
I want to reiterate himself.
Only wear badges I've earned.
Cool. See you guys.
Right.
Hey,
go courts.
Hello.
We're impressed with your team.
You what, sorry?
We're impressed with your team. So many people.
They're doing a lot of work.
Mm-hmm. Very important. We thought the corrections people had got stuck in your way
back there as well.
Some of them I think probably have.
We do not need the distraction.
This is the way.
Excuse me, mate.
Cheers.
Now,
first of all, Minister, welcome. Obviously, we're here to talk about
courts, just a- Make sure we're on the right program.
Yeah.
And we've got you until 5:15, so we've got an hour.
Okay.
All right? So I'll hand over to you. Obviously, we know Mr.
Kibblewhite, but it'd be good if you introduce your team, and then we'll get into
the questions.
Thank you. I do have some introductory remarks to make, but
I'll start off just by thanking the committee for their
time.
I look forward to answering your questions.
I have beside me the Secretary for Justice, Mr.
Andrew Kibblewhite, and behind me I have the Justice
too. And I won't go through and introduce all of them, or we will
go through that hour.
So it's great to be here as the Minister for Courts.
A well-functioning system matters because people rely on it
at some of the most difficult points in their lives.
Victims and their families need to know that their case will be dealt with
seriously and without unnecessary delay.
Businesses need disputes resolved, so they can get on with operating, and
defendants are also entitled to a fair hearing and the rule of
law. This government was elected to restore law and order, and
we're doing it. A key part of the equation is the
courts. My job in the courts' portfolio is to make sure that
the justice system can actually deliver justice
faster, more reliably, and with greater respect for
victims. When cases drag on for months or for years,
victims are forced to relive the most worst moments of their
lives. Witnesses lose confidence, families are left in
limbo, and offenders are not held to account quickly enough.
There's a lot more to do, but we're seeing progress.
The Chief District Court Judge's timely access to justice
protocol set a clear expectation that by June
2027, 90% of district court criminal cases
should be disposed of within the required time frames.
This is particularly important because the district court is where most New
Zealanders experience the justice system.
So since February 2024, the proportion of cases
disposed of within timely justice thresholds has increased from
81% to 85%. In the Auckland
Metro, the improvement has been even stronger, from 71%
in February 2024 to 83% as
at May 2026. The District Court's criminal backlog
has seen a 28% decrease since February
2024. This means fewer victims waiting for their day in
court to see justice delivered.
Mr. Chair, progress has also been made in other
jurisdictions too. As at April
2026, in the High Court, criminal cases are being completed
faster. Over the last year, the average age of completed criminal
cases has fallen by 12%, or 82 days.
In the High Court civil jurisdiction, the average age of
completed cases has fallen by 6%. In the Family
Court, a deliberate focus on older applications has reduced the
average age of active applications by 5%.
In the Coroner's Court, targeted investment and a backlog
reduction strategy are making a real difference.
And in the last 12 months, active cases have fallen by
20%, that is 1,036
fewer active cases, and the average age of active cases
has also fallen by 13%, or 80 days.
The Disputes Tribunal is also improving, with the average age of
completed cases down 17% in the last year.
The turnaround reflects a whole of justice sector effort.
This focus on timeliness is making a tangible difference for victims and
also for communities. We're also investing in courts
infrastructure, Mr. Chair. Budget 2026 provided
$100 million towards two new courthouses in Rotorua.
The Rotorua law courts building, which will support the High Court, District Court,
Coroner's Court, and tribunals, and the Rotorua Maori Land
Court. This is part of a wider pipeline of court
infrastructure, including major projects in Papakura,
Whanganui, Tauranga, and a significant upgrade at
Auckland District Court-
Mr. Chair
... the busiest courthouse in the country.
Sorry.
Just about finished, Mr. Chair.
No, of course, complete.
The government is also modernizing how people can access the courts.
Last year, the government passed legislation to improve and clarify
use of court remote participation.
One important change gives complainants, victims, and their support
people the option to remotely observe a criminal trial or
sentencing where suitable technology is available, unless a
judge decides otherwise, and that is a practical
victim-focused reform. The government is also progressing a first principles
review-
Mr. Chair. Point of order, Mr. Chair. Just a moment.
I don't-- I'm sorry to interrupt, Minister, but the Speaker's rulings say that for
an hour-long review, it should be a three-minute introduction, and this is a
half-hour review.
Right.
It's not a half hour-
No, it's an hour
Or even then, it's three minutes. We've been going for over five now.
I'm speaking to it.
I'm happy to yield my questions-
I'm going to let the minister-
... to the minister remarks
... continue.
Right? But I'd ask you to finish pretty soon.
But-
Just about finished
... you are to continue.
Thank you.
The government is also progressing a first principles review of the Courts Remote
Participation Act. Cabinet has agreed to replace that act with
a new high-level enabling act, supported by court
rules, to provide greater clarity and consistency
about when remote participation should be used.
I'd like to acknowledge, Mr. Chair, the court staff, the judiciary,
police, corrections, lawyers, and everyone across the justice
sector who's helping deliver these improvements. So thank you, Mr.
Chair, for letting me finish. I'm happy to take your questions.
There you go.
Right. Very good. Now I'm going to give the first question to Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Oh, thank you. And thank you, Minister.
Sweet.
You actually mentioned in your opening, I think it's $100 million to court
infrastructure.
Yes.
And you specifically, I think, mentioned Rotorua, so I want to hear more about what
is going to happen in Rotorua. But then what about the-- I mean, have you visited
lots of other court facilities? What are you seeing across the court
infrastructure, and what is this budget-
... um, really provide for updating that court infrastructure.
Thank you for your question. Yes. I actually went and visited Rotorua
Courts. Uh, I was going to go when the last storm had
occurred, just so I could see actually how bad the building is, because
I kept hearing that it was in a pretty bad state.
But I couldn't get there because of the storm.
So my first attempt, or my second attempt actually, occurred when I did the
announcement, and I had a tour of the Rotorua Court.
Now, what was made very clear to me is that over the last 10
years, there has been no ability to do any changes or
upgrades within that Rotorua court.
I saw paint peeling off the windows, uh, around the windows,
uh, in the ceiling there was...
It just is not fit for purpose. So I was looking at how we
can ensure that we get the Rotorua courts, uh, changed
or rebuilt as soon as we possibly can.
So at the moment, we have two buildings.
We've got the Rotorua Court in Te Puni Kai Street, which
houses the High Court, the District Court, your tribunals, and then
next to it is the Maori Land Court in a separate building.
Um, both these buildings are way past their use by date.
We have purchased land, or the Ministry of Justice have purchased land, and with
this $100 million investment, it enables the start
of the build of the Rotorua law courts.
And once that is finished or completed, around about
2030, we will then utilize where the courts currently
sit on Te Puni Kai Street and rebuild a new Maori Land
Court in that area. And it's really important that we have a Maori Land Court
that is fit for purpose in Rotorua because it does, or is one of the
busiest courts, Maori Land Courts, in New Zealand, and it encompasses
a wide
area in the Bay of Plenty and further afield.
Um, in answer to your question about other courts, I've been trying to get around
as many as possible. I was really excited when we got to the Papakura
Court build. So that's a new initiative, Mr.
Chair, where we're actually having modular, uh, rooms being built
off-site and being fitted to a site once it's brought
there. Uh, when I attended at the Papakura Court, they were
just adjoining these modular sites to the main building, and
it's amazing how fast that this is actually going up.
The modular buildings will also mean that if we have an increase
in needing court services in other areas, say new areas that are
developing, we can actually pick up these modular rooms and move them
to different areas instead of having to go through these hundreds of millions
of dollars of builds for new courthouses.
So that in itself is quite exciting.
I will point out that we are doing seismic remedy on some of
our courts, such as the Auckland courts, the Wellington High Court, the
Wellington District Court-
Can I get a supp on that?
... is having a seismic work done on that.
We've got new builds in Wanganui and Tauranga, as I
mentioned, uh, and of course, we'll have the Rotorua courts coming up as well.
So there's a heck of a lot of work going on with the courts at
the moment.
Okay. Right. Are you finished? Right, I'm going to turn-
Yeah. Thank you for that, um, outline of that
stuff. I was wondering about how that will translate into a measurable
uplift of Maori Land Court disposal rates and
if you could focus on, uh, the better user experience for whanau and-
Okay. I thought we were doing a supp on CapEx.
We were talking about Maori Land Courts.
Okay.
I don't mind.
All right. Well, we're going to do that, but I was...
Um, then I'll come back to Greg. Okay.
All right.
Yeah. I guess it relates, right?
Sorry?
I just figured it relates.
Yeah. No, I'm happy to answer that.
Yeah.
So yeah, the Maori Land Court was really in a, I wouldn't call it disarray,
but it wasn't working appropriately. It hasn't been for many, many years.
And then, of course, we brought in the, um, Pātaka Whenua,
uh, trial, which basically digitalized the court system
within the Maori Land Court. And, um,
as part of the Pātaka Whenua review, they had
41 recommendations for how to ensure that it works effectively.
I'm pleased to say that all 41 recommendations have now been completed.
Seven of those recommendations have transited into BAU.
Um, this means that we're going to have a more efficient system as it
starts to be implemented. The full implementation of all
those 41 recommendations are expected to be in
place by the end of 2026. In my recent,
um, visit to the Rotorua, um, courts, I actually went
into the area of the Maori Land Court where they do the Pātaka Whenua.
It looks really, really good. It's an area where there's computers available
for the public to come in to be able to use it to look up
online, uh, what their land is or
where it is, all the information that they're looking for.
Um, what's really important in this change or upgrade that they've
done is being able to closely align with a name that
might sound similar, because if you have a spelling mistake, it would just cut
you off. But now it's actually bringing up, well, we can't find
anything under that name, but it might be this name or further.
So allowing people a space and place to go and
help within the court staff to navigate through that system.
So we're getting there. There's been a few delays, of
course, um, but we're getting there.
In regard to the delays of cases coming through, we're looking
to set not so much guidelines, but, um,
what's the word that I'm looking for?
Standards, uh, to be met for, um, getting
through those backlogs as well. So that's been introduced in
some of the other courts, and the Maori Land Court are currently working on what
those standards would look like, what are the type of goals that they're looking
for, because really, they need to be able to measure that
the changes that we're making have been effective.
So they're just working on that at the moment so that they can have standards
to look to attain
Can I, uh, let's just deal with Maori Land Court.
We've started there, right? Um, Greg, we want to go
or I'll put a question to you that, um, which is
in line with what I've just been asked, but the disposal timelines
f- for the Maori Court-
Yeah
... are below performance.
Yes
... below the standard.
I'd agree.
Is that--
What's the reason contributing to that?
Is that because we're a long way down this pathway
now,
why are these just,
uh, cases that are much more difficult and that's why they're taking a longer time?
Or is it some other reason that's contributing to it?
That's the first bit, and I think the second bit is obviously what you're going to
do about it.
So. Sorry.
Yes.
Uh, Carl Craver, Chief Operating Officer.
Um, so, uh, Pātaka, uh, is a com- is the name of a computer
system. So we implemented a brand new computer system, uh, where
members of the public, um, and staff would use to-
Mm
... file applications and then progress and process the applications.
So, uh, it would be fair to say we didn't do as well as what we should have in the
implementation of that new IT system.
Um, uh,
a- a- and, and so
that created quite significant backlogs and, and that's what we've
acknowledged. Um, so, uh, the post-implementation
review the minister was talking about, um, was the
end result of not doing a very good job of implementing the new tool.
Um, and so those recommendations are being put in place, and we're seeing greater
disposals now than what we have had historically.
So at the moment, we're disposing about 900 cases a month versus a
historic average of between 300 and 400.
Oh, right.
So the system is working better, but we've got a backlog that we're working
through.
And how much is the backlog? Put the 900 into context.
Uh, it's about 12,000, 13,000, uh, cases at the
moment.
So how long before you think the backlog will be fixed?
Um, well, interestingly enough, the, one of the things with the sys- the system
is better now for people to apply, so we've got increased inflow.
So, um, uh, I, I, I couldn't put a time on, on the
estimates on how that would take-
Right
... because it depends on the inflow.
So the inflow is-
Or I don't want to be quoted. The inflow's up on a, on a reasonable
amount, which means that whatever gains we're making with disposing 900
cases is somewhat negated a little bit because of the, the new ease to
apply to the courts.
Right.
So.
Well, let's ask the question another way.
W- um, what would be the oldest outstanding
claim that hasn't been dealt with in the court?
Um, I, I can provide that figure. The, uh, it won't be because of the Pātaka
IT system or because of va- varying things.
So somebody can apply, but if the...
It depends, you know, if, if it's about governance or the trust or
succession, some things have to be dealt with in a certain order.
So until some of those things are dealt with, the case can't progress.
So there will-- there are some older claims sitting in there, but I, I don't have
the figure off the top of my head.
Okay. Greg, I, I want you to-
Yeah. Well, just, just, I'll just start with a sup on, um, Stevenson's
question around the courts, Rotorua.
Um, Minister, have you been to the, what, Hapū Court in your term?
Yes, I have. Yeah.
And is that, I noticed that you haven't mentioned that.
Um, is that, so it's, it's a... Would you agree that's probably in worse
shape than Rotorua?
Uh, I wouldn't say it's in as worse shape, but I'd say it's in pretty bad shape.
Absolutely. Uh, Rotorua has been in a state of
disrepair for a longer period, for over 10 years.
Um, I think both courts are in quite bad condition.
Um, uh, the reason why I haven't mentioned it is because it's not in the budget
considerations. Managed to get $100 million to get
Rotorua underway, but could not, uh, in the
financial fiscal constraint that we are in as a government at
the moment, could not afford to get both or funding for both
courts to go ahead.
Well, of course, that was in part of a,
a PPP proposal-
Yes
... wasn't it, to be paired up-
... with Rotorua. What happened there?
So that's right. It was a PPP for both courts to be done at the same
time. But, I mean, the reality is we have a $9 billion
interest debt. I mean, that, that interest debt is more
than the justice sector, um, of courts, police,
corrections, Ministry of Justice and Customs, their entire
budget all together. So at the end of the day, when I'm trying to
solicit the government for money to do both courts on a PPP, the
money actually just wasn't there.
So it seemed more prudent to then separate the two and see if we could at
least get Rotorua underway, uh, and, uh, have one of the
courts in process, and we picked Rotorua because it is in a
really bad state. It has been 10 years of disrepair there.
Um, and like I said, Waitākere, that will be my next one that I'll be going for.
It's really urgent to get these done.
I will say, though, that there is over 40% of the
court buildings around New Zealand are currently being worked on in some
form to bring them up to standard. It's just a reality of them being
left, um, not, not by the past governments, but successive
governments over a period of time.
It's now got to a point where we can't wait any longer, so we're trying to do
the best we can with what we've got.
You're aware that, uh, some, um, land is being disposed of
out in Waitākere. Was that, um, court's
land that's just been
disposed of? Is that-
No. We still have the land.
We, we have, we have purchased separate land there in the same way we had with
Rotorua.
Okay.
So we, we are, we-- I mean, as the minister says, uh, Waitākere
is, is at the top of the list of unfunded projects now.
We've, we've actually done a lot of work over the last few years in trying to get
much more rigorous about assessing all of our court buildings and what they need
and the impact on operations and safety and seismic and all of that.
We, we have a 30-year plan where we, uh, can identify the
conditions of the courts and see how they're tracking.
Successive governments that started under the last government have been continued
under this government have supported that with an investment track that, to be
honest, is unprecedented in the court system. It's a good thing.
We have actually been able to sustain quite a steady
program of work in the courts.
But the fact remains that the Waitakere is next, and that's
still in a pretty dire state. We've done some work in Waitakere.
We've done more work around services and air conditioning.
I think there's more work has been done on the roof there because
we have had some quite bad leakage issues on that site.
So we've done some work-
A few sick lawyers there.
Hmm?
A few sick lawyers, too.
Well, we have to monitor that, the air quality in all our
buildings. Obviously, the committee will be aware that in Rotorua recently, we had
to actually vacate the judges because of some of the black mold.
So we've had to do that and then replace carpets and the like and do some spot
repairs so that we can keep that building
functional until the new one is constructed.
And just on a broader issue then, obviously, and Minister, you've alluded
to the law and order focus of the government and the initiatives, which
inevitably are going to put pressure on the court as
the entry level to
the justice sector.
Mm.
Were projections done as to what the increase would likely to
be in the courts? I know some broader ones, but
how the
footfall coming through the courts,
and was that translated when-- you,
like every other minister, have applied for, gone
presumably to the Minister of Finance and-
... the department. Was that given enough weight when you were
considering
the need to ensure that courts were in good
shape?
Yeah. If I look at
what we're spending at the moment, we haven't cut in any way.
We've actually increased the spending within the courts by
4.9% under Vote Courts, and that's just to try and
help the operation of the courts to keep going, as well as
just the need that we have within there.
So this uplift outpaces both the population
growth of 0.6% and inflation of 3.1%.
So yes, we are moving more people through the courts. They're coming in.
We have adjusted upwards as a result of that as well.
But what I will point out is that the goals that have
been set by the chief district court judge of the 90%
timeliness is actually getting there.
We've moved from 81% up to 85% with more
people moving through. So it's a fine balance,
trying to find efficiencies in how we maneuver
through the court system and get people through it faster, as well as more
people starting to come through.
And so, okay, just leading on then to Te Ariki.
And
does that play an important role,
given there's now going to be a--
well, I see some trials in South Island-
Yes
... coming up by the end of the year and next year.
Yes.
How important is that going to be as
dealing with this presumably continued increased inflow?
It's going to create some huge efficiencies within the court system,
including decreasing the number of events where a person
has to appear in person at court, and then that
session doesn't progress because somebody isn't ready.
So I understand that the committee will be having a
trial or a look at the Te Ariki pretty soon.
You'll see how impressive it is once you actually sit down and
see what gets inputted into that system.
You're quite right, we're going to start off with the family court rollout,
what we call a soft launch, around the 23rd of November in
Christchurch, Ashburton, with some other pieces that are working there.
And
further rollouts in March 2027, April 2027, and
May. But what I will say, though, is if we find that
there is an error somewhere within the system that we need to fix,
we are quite happy to postpone the 23rd of November rollout
to March to make sure that we are good to go and it will
be effective when we start it. So we're trying to make sure we have the best
product. But the efficiencies that will be gained
specifically in court appearances will create
more time, not only for judges but for court staff as well.
Just being able to see on the computer what's been filed and that
everything has been filed in a timely fashion so that a court event
can progress.
So Te Ariki is becoming pretty much mission-critical in
being able to-
That is
To actually absorb the increased workload.
Well, that's probably some of the-
Well, that'll be-
... referral questions
... that'll be a benefit of Te Ariki is that it will
be efficient, so.
Yeah. I just wonder now, given the news of the immigration issue
that's come out this morning,
are you satisfied with Te Ariki that there's been sufficient external
evaluation of that program?
Or are you
relying on
assurances? I'm not in any way casting any aspersions on
justice, but I just say,
previous experience of it, you probably have yourself, where you'd probably be
looking for some assurance now from a fairly independent source
that this is still going on track, on time, and going to deliver
Even given the mission creep, that's probably...
Well, there has been some mission creep, but-
Yeah
... despite that, that it will deliver. I mean, are you reassured of that?
I am reassured of that. I'll let Mr.
Kibblewhite speak to it, but I am reassured of that because I have constant updates
that tell me where we're sitting within it, and I've also had the
opportunity to experience it. And I think once the
committee sees it as well, you'll see just how beneficial it's going to be for the
entire system. So, I do have confidence, but I'll let the secretary
speak.
Yeah. So, Te Oreka, it's a project that's going well.
It's on track. We're doing testing with judges and with registry
staff, and they're responding well to it.
The question was about external assurance.
So we have a steering committee that is not just Ministry of Justice.
We have judiciary on that. We have reps from other agencies, and we
have independent people who have come and been part of that from time to time.
We have an independent
member from Australia who has been involved in these digitization
projects, and so he's a member of our steering committee that we have
over it. In addition to that, we've run successive IQAs, independent
quality assurance processes, where we've had experts come and do a review of
where we're at, give us some assessments, and give us
recommendations which we've acted on.
And obviously earlier in the process, we had gateway reviews as well.
So we are quite deliberately leaning in with a lot
of external assurance to make sure that it's
going well. And to be honest, some of what Carl described, we
had the dubious privilege of having run a
smaller scale digitization project that we didn't get
right as much as we needed to in Pātaka Whenua.
So we've fixed that and it's now generating sort of results, but
it went through the sort of
journey that we wouldn't want to have to go through with the much bigger one, which
is Te Oreka. So no, we're in good shape at the moment and
we have a lot of external assurance, and that external assurance is really valuable
to us.
If I may, and just with the extra emphasis, again, the minister's
talked about on justice and on that
sector. Has that brought about much mission creep into
this?
No, it hasn't brought about mission creep in Te Oreka.
We're going to start with the family court, which we
are continuing to do. We're going to then move into criminal and high court.
We're actually bringing some things forward a little bit, but the intent was always
to do the, essentially the whole court will end up running on this
system across different jurisdictions, and we're holding in
quite a disciplined way to that. So we're not suffering
from mission creep with it.
And you reckon you can get the lawyers to use it?
Well, certainly, we're engaging again with lawyers.
Some of it we will require them to use it, to be honest, in the family court.
From March next year, they will be
expected to file electronically and then engage with it.
We're pretty confident from all the testing we've done that they will want to use
it. At the moment, when
you're sitting and trying to work your way through a court, you've got paper in
different places, you've got digital copies of things in different places, and that
will all be made so much more
rigorous. When we've run judges through it, and judges who
are not necessarily come from a technological background, the feedback we're
getting is really positive.
There wouldn't be many of those.
Beg your pardon?
I wouldn't judge.
But I've got a supplementary from Rima
Nathan.
That's all right. Thank you. I'll give this.
It's a kind of segue supplementary.
Thank you, Minister and team. With respect to, we
just touched on family courts, and Minister, you
mentioned family courts in your introductory remarks, and I know that
part of the increase in funding for courts, there is some type of
focus on family courts as well.
What's the importance of getting
court timeliness with family matters under
control?
What
are we seeing as a result of not
having that court timeliness?
I receive complaints from people about the amount of
time that their cases are sitting within the family court, and when
young children are involved in those cases, they're getting older and older,
and sometimes they're being pulled away from another parent.
So actually maneuvering into the family court area
to try and get some efficiencies there so we can get faster means
settling cases for those people, for those families,
and for those children, and that's really important.
This is part of the reason why we will be starting with the family
court in Te Oreka because it is a court that desperately needs those
efficiencies. But if I may, Mr. Chair, I'd just like
to speak to some of the things that we're doing in the family court-
I was going to ask you
... to try and get rid of these backlogs.
So there's a family court action plan,
which was launched in 2025 and '26, and the
action plan identified 10 key
areas that we should be focusing on, the court managers and the registry
staff to be focusing on. And at the end of April
2026, the number of applications in backlog actually
reduced by 11% nationally from
9,901 to 8,831. It's still a lot,
but it's starting to come down. The number of cases without a future event
scheduled reduced by 23% from 1,062
to 815. And the number of data entry
errors decreased by 72%
from 247 to 69. So we're
currently working to help and develop a timely access to
justice standard for family court proceedings.
So this is similar to what the chief district court judge has done with
the standards that he's trying to set within the criminal backlog of the
district court, 90%. So the ministry and the
judiciary are working together on what would be- An achievable
outcome that we're trying to look for, a standard that they are trying to meet,
and for both proposed defended and undefended
applications. And I will also note that in
2025, the full complement of 13 family
court associates has been delivered.
So they've been operating for 11 months now,
with six appointed in 2024 and seven
appointed early last year. And since they were
introduced, there's been an increase in the settlement conferences, which means
they don't even have to go to court because they're getting their stuff
sorted beforehand. And compared to May
2024, the settlement conferences have increased
by 96%, which is absolutely huge.
From 1,425 to 2,904
in the year ending April 2026. And these are mainly
directed at the Care of Children Act and property applications.
So there's work being done in the Family Court, but there's still, like I said,
over 8,000 families that are still struggling to get through the
system. So we're working on it, and when Te Ao Reka comes in,
more efficiency should be gained.
And hopefully, I will be here again next term, giving you even
higher stats for the Family Court.
And supplementary, if I may please.
Minister, so with all these improvements in
numbers,
am I to understand a big part
of those improvements, in your opinion, is because of those key
focus areas and that kind of clarity of purpose?
Yes. Well, trying to figure out where is the jam, what is the problem that we're
trying to fix here? Finding 10 of those and then saying, "Okay,
well, could we work on these 10 areas and get some improvement?"
So they have. They've been working on those 10 areas, and hence we're starting to
see those improvements.
Mm-hmm.
So once Te Ao Reka comes in, again, it's just going
to move things a lot faster. So just speaking to
Member Greg O'Connor, talking about the Family Court
itself and
the plan of Te Ao Reka,
yes, it's going to create these efficiencies, but we haven't even
implemented it yet, and we're already getting efficiencies just because we're
trying to ID where the hold-ups are and
whether or not we can smooth those out.
Thanks, minister.
If I could-
Please, yeah
... just cop supplement. Well, three of the biggest hold-ups, is it right
that it's self-representation, adjournments,
and psychological reports?
Yeah.
Does that coincide with your understanding of what three of the
biggest barriers to progressing or
improving performance-
Yeah
... Te Ao Reka's not going to fix any of those, is it?
No, it's not. But,
looking at reports,
it's remote participation. Okay, I'm going to go from memory here.
Looking at reports, we're actually looking at more efficient ways to be able to do
these reports. So within the reports, stopping this-
Is it psychological reports you're talking about?
Well, this is all types of reports.
Making sure that
we have report writers that are able to do the job.
Now,
I know of a report
sector that's been brought together $900 per report.
Alcohol.
Yes, alcohol and drug reports. So just looking at how we're going to be more
efficient with those report writings as well.
Sorry, could you give me what those other ones were?
It was reports-
There was self-representation-
Yeah
... I understand is a
holdup.
Yeah.
Adjournments and psychological reports, which they're not
mutually exclusive, any of those things.
Yeah.
Well, that's my understanding. It may well be that I'm...
Is that-
They're all factors.
Are they major factors?
I wouldn't say they necessarily are top three. They are important factors.
Obviously, adjournments-
So what are the top three? Because this is obviously an interest for the committee.
It would depend which jurisdiction that you're-
We're talking the Family Court
... we're talking in the Family Court jurisdiction.
Well, fam, those points I brought up relate-
I might see if-
Just while we get someone up, the adjournments will actually
be helped by Te Ao Reka because quite often-
Sorry, the-
The adjournments will be helped by Te Ao Reka because a lot of the adjournments
happen because people aren't ready.
So you'll be able to see within the portal that people aren't ready, and
it will save people actually having to turn up-
As an MP, local MP, I've heard many people
over the 12 years been involved in Family Courts.
Whether this is right or wrong, I don't know. I'm just... What I've heard, right?
But a lot of it seems,
can be vexatious by one particular party in
a failed marriage particularly-
Yes
... or partnership, whatever term you want to use.
And also the issue that hearings are held and
people simply don't turn up.
Yeah.
And sometimes it's quite deliberate.
And the lack of ability to be able to make those people turn up
and address the issue in a timely manner
amongst ex-dysfunctional families or
dysfunctional ex-members, right?
That's certainly one thing. The psychological reports is obviously what
Mr. O'Connor's talking about. But I'd be keen to hear what you say
about that or whether there are other things that you view as more important.
Well, certainly Mr. O'Connor's right.
Self-represented litigants are an issue, and they're an issue across a number of
jurisdictions, particularly in the Family Court.
All of the points you raised I
think are accurate. Adjournments are probably, they're an issue in the Family
Court. They're probably more of an issue than the criminal
jurisdiction, and there's a range of reasons that underpin
that. Part of the issue with the Family Court has been,
I think the
Often a difficulty for families to really keep up to speed with
what's happening. In some communities, it's been a very hard system
to negotiate. So we do have a court role now, a
navigator or a kaiārahi, which will actually help families and
whānau step through some of the issues that they
are grappling with.
I might-
There's another one. You talked about
potential vexatious litigants, and of course, we've got
legislation which will allow a judge to determine if
somebody is being repetitive or vexatious and
actually stop them from putting cases through in the court for a period
of time.
So which legislation is that? Is that the-
Yeah, I was just trying to find which one it is.
We're putting through 18 pieces at the moment just under my name.
I'm not quite sure which one it is. Is it Te Ururoa Flavell?
Yeah.
It's the-
It's in the criminal jurisdiction.
It's not, that's not just for judge-
Not in the Family Court.
That's just not for Family Court, is it, that one?
Yeah, sorry.
No.
No, sorry. I'm wrong. That was in the criminal jurisdiction, not in the Family
Court only.
Ultimately, it's for a judge in the Family Court to hold a party to account.
But can they?
Yes.
But I don't hear of that.
One of the issues that Te Ururoa is designed, so
if you actually have conversations with judges and others who-
Okay
... about exactly the issue of holding people to account, it's often quite
difficult to determine exactly who needs to be held to account and
how, and part of what, one of the things that Te Ururoa will
change is a much greater transparency over what's required when and
who has and hasn't done the filings that they were intended to do.
So we will, through that process, and just bringing a transparency to
who is up to where, we'll actually make it much more possible and
feasible for a judge to assert a bit more kind
of directive authority because they'll just have more information about that.
Whether they do or not is obviously an issue that individual judges will-
Yeah
... will make a choice on.
But that's sitting on the new system.
Some of that will be much better enabled-
Okay
... by the new system.
There will be things- Sorry.
Sorry.
There will be things within that system where, so for example, you
hear lawyers might say, "Oh, I did file that,"
but that hasn't come through-
Yeah
... to the judge yet. Well, under Te Ururoa, the judge will be able to say, "No,
you didn't because it's not here," or, "Yes you
did, but the time says that you just filed it five minutes ago.
You didn't file it last week." So that's where we'll get some of those gain
deficiencies as well with TA, Te Ururoa.
So you asked about psych reports. You talked about three, Greg.
Yeah.
Greg?
Sorry.
You asked about psych reports.
Yeah. Well, again, the same thing.
Well, even just I can dig down on that last comment though.
Mm.
Because, well, is it Te Ururoa, and perhaps you may not be able to answer this, but
is Te Ururoa, those reports, will they not now go through
human hands? Well, so those reports, is it anticipated that it'll
be pretty much-
It'll still be considered by all the humans in the court.
It's just the information will be available on a screen that everyone is-
On the portal
... is visible to everybody. So they'll be able to see the structure of the case
and the file and all of the information that's there.
It's not a tool that introduces a different,
an electronic judgment. It's a tool that-
No
... brings transparency. Yeah
But where it goes. Phys- physically, it can be done from the office, right?
Yeah. So it'll just enable all of the participants to actually know where they
stand and it'll, I think, enable a judge to
actually be, I would imagine, much more
straight up and down about who's responsible for what and therefore the
consequences if people are not delivering.
But we could, in the Family Court, if it would be helpful to the committee, we
could do a
short... I'm conscious we
haven't been precise about the three issues that you raised, Mr. O'Connor.
We could come back with a short answer to that.
That would be helpful, and I think what Mr.
O'Connor was alluding to, which I think he was going to get to, is the
fact there seems to be a shortage of psychiatrists
and
that's not your issue per se, but it's obviously having a big
impact on justice being served, particularly in the Family Court.
Mm-hmm.
So how are you dealing with that and what you're doing, and I presume it's a
Ministry of Health initiative?
Well, it's Ministry of Health, but there are also issues in the justice
system as well because of the requirements for reports and if the,
so we're actually-
Yeah
... it's an active policy question about whether you can
vary some of the requirements, which may mean that you can
actually
take better advantage of what is a limited resource in terms of
psychologists and others who can prepare those reports.
Okay.
So what we've done to...
So yes, it's a shortage in the health sector.
Yeah.
And so what we've done is created our own private list of
psychologists who can prepare those reports, and we can go to them directly asking
them to do so.
Right. Cool. Dr. Sunan?
Just want to do a quick follow-up question because you mentioned that around
vexatious litigant, it's in the criminal proceed-
I-
But there's also another one
I've put the minister wrong.
Yeah.
It's not in the Supreme Court. It's more that it's in the senior courts.
Yeah. No, but what-
But you look at your timely legislation then.
No, because there was another one that was specifically mentioned, which is, I
believe it was like Victims of Family Violence Strengthening
Legal Protection-
Oh, yeah
... Legislation Bill.
Yeah.
How does that then interact when it comes to the vexatious- ...
litigation? Because I thought that was Family Court.
It was-
Sorry, that's not my bill and it's not a courts question, so I'm not-
Maybe that goes back to-
... I'm not briefed on that one
... your question.
But-
Okay. Sure
... yeah, that could-
Look, I think that
maybe it's sort of
ultimately, unfortunately you have the responsibility for
Time and Supreme Court, right?
Yes.
There'll be a whole lot of reasons why things are happening, some in your direct
control, some not.
Yes.
But I think
if the proposition was right about what I'd experienced, and it's my
first experience as a local MP about vexatious, what
would be helpful when you do a summary, and you've offered that, Mr.
Collcutt-
Mm-hmm
... is actually
Informing the committee about some of those issues and, in fact, it may
be that it is a legislative thing that because this is what the Justice Committee
is, it would be helpful to have that sort of insight from you, right?
Mm. We can-
Because we want to see. We'd like you to keep coming
here before the committee, and every year saying how you've got reduced it,
but there'll be a point where it's outside your control.
And I think we're missing the argument if we're
thinking in strictly court set, and it's like when you come
and talk about the justice precinct, yeah?
Yeah. Well, the good news is the committee will have many opportunities to talk
to me alongside ministers this week.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Can I just ask just another question around
time quarterly about, oh my God, for timeliness.
One of the things we've noticed in terms of the criminal case disposal
rate is that we're looking, so we're looking at 83% against a
90% target. But we also remembered seeing that
the measure itself has changed in terms of some of the
categories. Would you be able to, because so we actually have no
real point of comparison from previous years because of the
change in measures. Would you be able to speak to how that
potentially-
There's only, I think, one change that has happened, and it was something that was
signaled when the chief district court judge first brought the
changes in.
Because in some courts, if you think of a Matariki court
or an alcohol and drug court, occasionally then
there'll be a deliberate deferral of a final decision on
sentencing because the
offender, often after the point that they have pled guilty,
will
be sent off to do various programs and the like, which they then
may take into account before final sentencing occurs.
And so occasionally there is a deliberate extension of time
before the case is closed,
in a relatively small proportion.
But that in,
I think midway through last year-
It's probably further back.
It was further back than that?
August.
August last year.
Yeah.
We just made that adjustment so that they
would be taken out of the 90%, and I think the difference was about, was it about
1%?
Yeah, just under.
And so that meant that the figures improved by about 1% because we were
being more accurate in terms of where the delays were
caused by delay as opposed to deliberate decisions by judges.
Mm.
So apart from that, the numbers since we've had the standard should be
entirely comparable. And it's actually just a little visible tweak when we
see our charts that you would be able to track.
Thank you. And just before I forget, apologies it hasn't been
mentioned, but just want to thank the minister, but also just Justice Secretary in
general for finally funding for the Rotorua Courthouse.
Yes.
Yeah.
Thank you for that.
Right, minister, we've just about 12 minutes, so
any new topics?
Yeah. Well, no, it's the Family Court one.
I'd just like to look, obviously, it's something that's pleased, Mr.
Chairman, you brought it up, that like most electorate MPs and you're obviously
hearing it yourself, minister, about a lot of dissatisfaction-
Mm
... with that. Is there any work you're contemplating or
underway to actually look at the way,
forget about how Te Aorerekura might make it more efficient really, but
just the way people access system, any
sort of review of the Family Court?
Because it's just every time
we have someone who's gone through the system and
one side's generally unhappy-
Mm
... largely by the time it's come to a dispute process.
Is there any work or are you intending to
sort of commission any work around improving Family Court?
I'm not looking to commission work on a review of the Family Court right
now or in the immediate future because I think any review that we
do on the courts should be done after Te Aorerekura has been
implemented because we're going to see a whole lot of efficiencies
there. Although it's not the answer, and I do appreciate that,
but it will show us where those efficiencies are and then direct us
into those other areas like we did with Maori Land Court.
What are the 10 areas that we could improve after we've done Te Aorerekura?
But we kind of need to make sure that that is in there in the first instance.
Mm.
But I do note that in Budget 2026,
$5.2 million has been directed
to address pressures and delays specifically in the Family
Court system. So they'll be looking at what improvements that they can make
with that money in the meantime. But I do
personally feel that if a review was undertaken many, many years
ago, we could have been in a much better place sooner.
But I'm not prepared to waste the taxpayer money on a review
very shortly when we're about to implement Te Aorerekura, which will make
substantial change across all jurisdictions.
Okay. Can I just-
So that's one to-
Yeah.
If I just quick on that one.
Mr. McRobie.
Can I just add, I mean, the reality is we've actually done, there has been a pretty
active work program in the Family Court over the last few years since the Family
Court associates as a
new
judicial position, and we've seen the impact they've had.
I think before the house presently to look at
exactly what their jurisdiction can cover.
So that will be helpful there as the navigator sort of the card here that I've
talked about. We're doing work in the family dispute resolution space, some of
which we've done through the nature of our contracting.
And if you can have more successful
family dispute resolution mechanisms in place, then you have less
people going into the court. You've got to be careful about where you apply that
because it's not always appropriate, but where it's appropriate, it gives you much
better outcomes than going through the court system.
So I absolutely hear the committee's dissatisfaction with
the performance as you get informed by the Family Court, but it's been
an area of quite active work over the last few years.
Te Aorerekura will actually- Take that to a new level, and then we'll have a much
better opportunity to see what's needed beyond that.
Okay. Now we're going to-
That just sounded like an IT-led solution.
That's the last bit. I think all the other things to this point are not IT-led.
The Family Court Associates-
Yeah
... is not IT-led. The Navigators is not IT-led.
What we're doing in the dispute resolution space is not IT-led.
Righto. Now, we're going to go... We've got two new questions, different topics.
First one is Mr. Jamie Arbuckle.
Thank you, Minister. There's big changes ahead with resource management
reforms, and my question to you is, in the budget
is roughly $29 million to look at
new type of trade tribunal and the environment court going forward.
So is that new money, or is that money that has been
underpinned by something new that's coming up?
So, interested how that has
been calculated, where the demand and
the foresight, and why you need that money put aside.
Yes, so there'll be a new planning and environmental tribunal that will come on
board once the new RMA is underway.
That is all new funding for that tribunal.
That funding will pay for the tribunal to operate, for the
adjudicators within it that are required, and of course, all the staffing for
court that is required as well. We were not in a
position to be able to fund it through baselines.
So, the minister in charge there ensured
that the ministry would not be out of pocket with this new
tribunal being stood up once the RMA goes
through. It's going to be effective.
Again, it will mean that if we can get people through a tribunal process,
then it will free up what will become the planning environmental
court.
So it will be win-wins on both sides.
Anything more?
No, that's it.
Right. Now, Mr. Todd Stevenson wants to put you on the rack.
Oh not quite. But
remote participation, you mentioned that in your opening.
Obviously, this committee
passed some legislation to enable that.
Yes.
I think you referenced that there's going to be some more initiatives around AVL
or audio-visual participation and remote participation
supported by this budget. But can you talk a bit more to what you've kind of got
planned? Is it extending what's already being done? Is it some new initiatives?
Where is my AVL one? The courts remote participation
one-
Mm
... is actually a really big one, and it comes across all of the justice
sector. So it's not about just improving what's happening in the
courts, it's also about improving what's happening within the police
stations-
Corrections
... and within corrections as well.
All of them have to move on at the
same speed, I guess. It's no point us putting
AVL in all of the courts when your local prison
or police cells aren't able to accommodate it.
So there is a bit of a plan occurring in that space.
But in the 12 months ending March 2026, 70% of
eligible events for defendants in custody in the criminal
jurisdiction of the district court were held using AVL.
So it goes to show that there is a large number of
board need for it. And if I think specifically of
cases in Nelson where somebody is being held, say,
down in Christchurch,
in Christchurch Men's Prison, for example, if they have a case in
Nelson, it takes two correction officers out
of the prison into a van to drive that person all the way to
Nelson to have an event, or it may not even go
forward, and then they've got to take them all the way back.
So having the AVL increase use
is really important. A main factor of this is to
ensure that the judiciary are comfortable with using this.
So there was a review that was done, that AVL Courts and Remote
Participation review. That has only recently come to
us. But effectively, I've taken to Cabinet and said, "We need to redo this."
They've agreed, and we will look to do a whole new
piece of legislation on the courts' remote participation just to make sure
it's fit for purpose, but also allow those other agencies to be
involved as well. So, the courts,
corrections, New Zealand Police should be able to use it all remotely,
and once again, it will be efficient.
More importantly, it will enable victims to be
able to watch remotely as well and not have to be within a
courtroom to see a sentencing occur.
So overall, I think it's another win-win,
not only for the courts and our justice system, but for
victims especially, and also for defendants.
So new legislation will be coming to upgrade it, and we will no
doubt be looking for more pūtea in the future once we
understand exactly where and how we need to grow AVL.
Thank you.
Right. There's a supplement for you from Mr. Jones.
Just on, well, clearly there's a lot of moving parts in making sure
that that's going to work, particularly since each police
station and court is going to have to have
upgraded capability, to say the least.
Initially, there's going to be a bit of postcode lottery in this, isn't there?
I mean, you're not going to be able to do everything together.
So
you've talked about the need for more funding.
There's going to be considerably more funding, isn't it, across the whole sector
because this is... And even with the Te Reo too,
just there's so many different parts of the justice sector are going to have
to join up here.
Yeah. Well, with Te Reo, we've already got computers within the courts
that will be able to pick up Te Reo once it's running.
I can't speak for Corrections, and I can't speak for Police, but the majority
of our courts do have an AVL system in place.
Every single one that I've been into has an AVL room somewhere
for a victim to go into. So the- I guess the
equipment is there. Some of it in some courts needs to be
upgraded, some of it in some courts needs additional,
but the majority of your courts actually already have it, but it's looking at
police and corrections as well.
Yeah. Well, it sounds like it doesn't matter how well the courts are going, unless
those are-
So we're doing work collectively as a justice sector to produce
a business case for remote participation across the sector.
So, as the minister says, there is already
some kit in those courts. There is also already, in all of those courts, a
projection of investment, because all of us have a program
currently. What we're doing at the moment is asking, well, if we were to think
of how we would move the whole sector forward, where are the bottlenecks going to
be across particularly courts, corrections, and
police? And what would be the investment that we would need to bring into that?
It will
give us a broad plan. There will still be individual decisions that will need to be
taken, and individual calls about where investment happens and how much can be
self-funded. And it will have to be a budget initiative if we go faster than
what we can already do in a self-funding way.
But we're doing work to pull together an integrated program,
a business case, that would look at what we would need to do in the
AVL space.
Okay. Just to-
Justice-led
... so I just want justice-led
... Camilla.
I think-
Justice-led, but very much with the whole sector.
All right.
You want to... Who's going to take it?
No, I just, no, that was important, justice-led, because I-
Justice-led, but very much a joint one, working-
Okay
... with police and corrections.
Sorry, Camilla.
No, that's fine. Just really quickly, with the AVL
rollout,
a key factor will be judicial utilization of that and judicial
discretion. So, is there going to be any changes to judicial discretion
in relation to the use of remote
participation for, say, preliminary
hearings?
Yeah. Well, there will always be judicial discretion.
They are the ones ultimately that will decide whether or not it can be used.
However, yeah, is there anything that you want to add?
Well, the judiciary have issued some protocols in this space, and those
protocols set out what their expectations are, essentially what's
the requirement that in a police station or in corrections that you would need to
be able to deliver. So, it's a
whole system solution, but within that solution, clearly the judiciary have a
particular role in relation to the case that's before them on any given
day.
And the ministry has spent quite some time working with the judiciary, because
that's very important to work with them and not work at them or try and
tell them what to do, but basically modernize it.
And this has been occurring over a number of years, where judiciary are
starting to come on board with, well, they can see the effects and how it will
benefit, not only them, but also victims and
those that are appearing before them.
There's quite high usage in the civil jurisdiction as well.
It's actually got a lot of applicability across the board. Mm-hmm.
So we've come up to time, but I'm going to give Dr.
Sue Ng
one question.
Thank you, Chair. Just a clarification question.
In Vote Court, previously you talked about Te Ao Mārama
just limiting to eight while you're reviewing it.
Mm-hmm.
But in Vote Court it says, "New initiative to improve the justice system,
including Te Ao Mārama, a new model for the district court to deliver
services."
Mm.
Is that another new model? Is it Te Ao Mārama-
No
... being now the new model?
It's keeping Te Ao Mārama operating in the eight areas in which they are
operating. What I will take the opportunity to say is that there are some aspects
of Te Ao Mārama that are being implemented throughout the court systems
within New Zealand where appropriate, those that we have found to
work really, really well. So it's just the continuation.
So, we will look to get a review done of
this around about, what year is it?
2020-
It's '27
... '27. I talked-
Yeah.
Yeah, 2028.
2028.
Because what you need to see is people go through the Te Ao
Mārama system, and then
have a bit of time so that we can see that it actually worked, and then pick out
what works well. So we're funding it, continuing to fund those eight
centers-
Mm
... so that we can do an appropriate review that tells
us how the people who entered that system have fared after
a period of time.
There were a little bit of-
All right. No
... kind of last-
No, we're well over now.
Okay. Thank you.
So, I want to thank the minister.
Thank you.
And I want to thank everyone from the courts.
And no doubt we're going to see you again, Mr.
Kapa-
Looking forward to it
... Justice, as well.
Yeah.
But thank you everyone today. You've been very helpful.
Thank you.
Right. So we're going to clear the room.
Good to see you.
Don't go crazy. You can-
Good job. Good job. Good job.